# Assignment VI

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Exercise 1

#### 1.1

> Consider a swapping system in which memory consists of the following hole sizes in memory order:
> 10 KB, 4 KB, 20 KB, 18 KB, 7 KB, 9 KB, 12 KB, and 15 KB. Assuming first fit is used, which
> hole is taken for successive segment requests of: (i) 12 KB, (ii) 10 KB and (iii) 9KB. Repeat for
> best fit and quick fit.

Available hole sizes: 10 4 20 18 7 9 12 15

First Fit

(i) 12KB TO 20KB
(ii) 10KB TO 18KB
(iii) 9KB TO 15KB

Best Fit

(i) 12KB TO 12KB
(ii) 10KB TO 10KB
(iii) 9KB TO 9KB

Quick Fit

(i) 12KB TO 12KB
(ii) 10KB TO 10KB
(iii) 9KB TO 9KB

#### 1.2

> If an instruction takes 10 nsec and a page fault takes an additional n nsec, give a formula for the
> effective instruction time if page faults occur every k instructions.

Formula for Effective Instruction Time

instruction time $t=10$ nanoseconds
Page fault additional $n$ nanoseconds
Page fault occur every $k$ instructions

Effective Time $= t + \frac{n}{k}$

#### 1.3

> A small computer has four page frames. At the first clock tick, the R bits are 0111. At t
> subsequent clock tics, the values are 1011, 1010, 1101, 0010, 1010, 1100 and 0001. Assuming
> the aging algorithm is used with an 8-bit counter what is the value of the four counters after the
> last tick.

| Page   | Counter Value |
| ------ | ------------- |
| Page 0 | `01101110`    |
| Page 1 | `01001001`    |
| Page 2 | `00110111`    |
| Page 3 | `10001011`    |

### Exercise 2 Page tables

> In the lecture it was mentioned that the translation from virtual address into physical address could be
> sped up using the TLB. Unfortunately this solution is not of much help in the case of large page tables.
> Investigate the two following alternative solutions: inverted page tables and multilevel page tables.

| Feature            | **Inverted Page Tables**                 | **Multilevel Page Tables**          |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| **Description**    | Single table for physical frames         | Hierarchical table structure        |
| **Table Size**     | Based on physical memory size            | Based on used virtual pages         |
| **Benefits**       | Saves memory for large virtual spaces    | Efficient for sparse address spaces |
| **Limitations**    | Slower lookups due to table search       | Requires multiple memory accesses   |
| **Implementation** | Uses a hash function or search mechanism | Adds memory for hierarchical levels |

### Ex. 3 — Research

> Write about half a page on the topic of codes bugs that lead to security holes; In particular illustrate the
> discussion using common examples. Do not forget to reference your sources of information.

Generally subtle bugs inside code files are vulnerable against hacker attack.
It can allow external attack to compromise computer system.
Flaw logic and insufficient input validation are two core reasons that
might potentially cause vulnerabilities.

SQL user input query sanitization failure made SQL query execution that are not
actually input. This attack is named as `SQL injection`.
[Wikipedia: SQL injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL_injection)

Multi Threading environment has `race condition` if process result in unexpected behavior.
Dirty Cow is one good example using write access to read only files.
[Red Hat: Dirty COW Race Condition. Dirty COW Vulnerability]()

When program access beyond allocated memory, then adjacent memory not allocated
will be overwritten. This part can have attack code, named as `Buffer overflow`.
[Wikipedia: Morris Worm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morris_worm)

When validation of user input in file path is not correct,
attacker can access inside system, navigating directories. Even access to the
`etc/passwd` might be possible. This is `Directory Traversal`.
[Fortinet Security Advisory](https://www.broadcom.com/support/security-center/attacksignatures/detail?asid=31736)

Attackers use bug in `Privilege Escalation` aiming higher access privilege
than programming system. For instance, Microsoft OpenSSL was attacked by Heartbleed bug.
[OpenSSL Heartbleed Bug](https://msrc.microsoft.com/update-guide/en-US/vulnerability/CVE-2021-34527)

When validation failure or user input encoding error occurs,
`XSS (Cross Side Scripting)`
became vulnerable against attacks. Then, other user's web browser can be injected
with attack codes that might save tokens and cookies required for login.
[Wikipedia: Samy (computer worm)](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samy_(computer_worm)>)

When memory is accessed after free, `UAF (Use After Free)` bug appears. Internet Explorer
had this, so had a lot of security issues.
[CVE Details. Database of Software Vulnerabilities.](https://www.cvedetails.com/)

Applications that have deserialized data is good way for attackers, `Deserialization Vulnerabilities`
inside code. Apache Struts had similar issue, leaking 147 million individual information!
[Apache Strtus](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/WW/S2-045)

### Ex. 4 — Linux

> Write a very short C program that leads to thrashing.

Code in `main.c`
