# Assignment II

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Exercise 1

A few years ago when computers featured less RAM it is was common to increase it in order to enhance
CPU performance. In order to better understand the link between the two we now create a simple model
for multiprogramming. We assume all the processes to be similar and spending the same fraction p of
their time waiting for Input/Output (I/O) to complete.

#### 1. What is the probability for n processes to be waiting at the same time, then express the CPU utilisation as a function of n?

Probability $p^n$

CPU Utilization $U(n)=1-p^n$ where $n$ is number of process.

#### 2. Sketch the curve representing the CPU utilisation as a function of the number of processes for the following values of p: 25%, 60% and 90%.

Suppose CPU Utilization $U$ function for $n$ number of process $U(n)$.

#### 3. A certain old computer has 256 MB of RAM, once loaded a light operating system uses 96 MB of RAM.

Several programs are launched each of them using 48 MB.

a) How many processes can be store simultaneously in memory?

Given 256 MB RAM, OS uses 96 MB, 160 MB left and
each process takes 48 MB.
Suppose 4 processors share 160 MB, then it is 40 MB per each,
which is less than 48 MB required for process to run.
If 3 processors share 160MB, then its capacity is 53.3 per each,
enough to handle each process.
Thus, `3` processes can be store simultaneously in memory.

b) Assuming an average of 90% I/O waiting time what is the CPU utilisation?

Since $p=0.9$ and $n=3$, $U(n)=1-p^n=1-(0.9)^{3}=1-0.729=0.271$
Thus, CPU utilization `U=27.1%`

c) What is the effect of adding 256 MB, 512 MB and 1024 MB of RAM. Argue on which
amount would be the most beneficial and would be worth the investment.

$256 + 256 \rightarrow (512 - 96) / 48 = 416 / 48 = 8.67 \rightarrow U(8)=1??.90^{8}=1??.430=0.570$

$256 + 512 \rightarrow (768 - 96) / 48 = 672 / 48 = 14 \rightarrow U(8)=1??.90^{14}=1??.206=0.794$

$256 + 1024 \rightarrow (1280 - 96) / 48 = 1184 / 48 = 24.67 \rightarrow U(8)=1??.90^{24}=1??.121=0.879$

### Ex. 2 ??Understanding system calls

#### 1. Briefly introduce strace and ltrace. Explain they could be helpful along the semester.

Both `strace` and `ltrace` are trace debugging tools.

`strace` traces based on system calls by following interaction between Linux kernel and program.

`ltrace` traces library calls instead of system call.
This shows logs of library dependent function calls.

#### 2. What are the manpages sections for system calls and library calls?

In convention, system calls are in section 2 and library calls are in section 3.

Use command like
`man 2 <system_call_name>` for system calls and
`man 3 <library_function_name>` for library functions.

#### 3. System calls.

a) What are the main types of system calls?

1. Process management: creation, termination, control `exit(0)`, `fork()`, `exec()`
2. File management: open close read write `open()`, `close()`, `read()`, `write()`
3. Device management: IO operation, peripheral interaction `ioctl()`
4. Information maintenance: system level info setup and retrieval `getpid()`, `getuid()`, `setuid()`
5. Inter Process Communication IPC: send message `pipe()`, `msgsnd()`

b) Run strace on the ls command and classify all the listed system calls.

```shell
strace ls
```

output file on `strace_ls.txt`

- Process protocol `execve("/usr/bin/ls", ["ls"], 0xfffff3920cf0 /* 53 vars */) = 0`
- Memory management `brk, mmap, munmap`
- File management `openat(AT_FDCWD, "..."), read(...), close(...)`
- Device management `ioctl(...)`
- Information maintenance `statfs(...), getrandom(...)`
- Communication `prlimit64(...)`
- Exit `exit_group(0)`

c) Select a line of your choice in strace output and explain its meaning.

```shell
openat(AT_FDCWD, ".", O_RDONLY|O_NONBLOCK|O_CLOEXEC|O_DIRECTORY) = 3
```

- `openat()`: Open file relative to a directory file descriptor.
- `AT_FDCWD` means directory is current working directory.
- `/lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libselinux.so.1` File opened in SELinux shared library.
- `O_RDONLY|O_CLOEXEC`: File is opened in read-only mode `O_RDONLY`, and `O_CLOEXEC` means file descriptor will be automatically closed if process performs `exec()` system call.
- `3`: This is the file descriptor returned by the system call.

d) How to attach strace to a running process? Describe a scenario where this could be handy

```shell
strace -p <pid>
```

`<pid>` should be ID of running process.

### Ex. 3 ??A simple system call

#### 1. Kernel printing.

a) What is the counterpart of printf() when working inside the Linux kernel?

The `printk` is the counterpart of `printf` inside Linux kernel log.
It is visible in `dmesg`.

b) Write the body a simple ?쐊ernel function??displaying ?쏮um is proud of you!??

```shell
void mum_is_proud(void) {
    printk(KERN_INFO "Mum is proud of you!\n");
}
```

`KERN_INFO` is one level of log, meaning it is not information.

#### 2. Headers and function name.

a) What header files should be included when adding a new system call?

```cpp
#include <linux/kernel.h>    // kernel-related functions including printk().
#include <linux/syscalls.h>  // system call macros like SYSCALL_DEFINE.
```

b) How are the macros `SYSCALL_DEFINE0` and `SYSCALL_DEFINEx` working?

`SYSCALL_DEFINE0(name)` defines system call with zero arguments. It internally uses the `asmlinkage` keyword, ensuring function called follows convention for system calls.

`SYSCALL_DEFINEx` defines system call with x number of arguments where xrange from 0 to 6.

c) Use the SYSCALL_DEFINE0 to define the new system call encouragement. Name your file
encouragement.c and save it in a folder encouragement at the root of the kernel source code

```c
#include <linux/kernel.h>
#include <linux/syscalls.h>

SYSCALL_DEFINE0(encouragement) {
    printk(KERN_INFO "Mum is proud of you!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

Save at root of the kernel source code.

```shell
cd ~/sched_ext-for-6.11/
mkdir encouragement
cd encouragement
echo '#include <linux/kernel.h>
#include <linux/syscalls.h>

SYSCALL_DEFINE0(encouragement) {
    printk(KERN_INFO "Mum is proud of you!\n");
    return 0;
}' > encouragement.c
```

#### 3. Makefile and Kbuild.

a) Jump to the end of Kbuild file and following the same patterns as on the last few lines, add
your encouragement directory there.

```shell
nano Kbuild
```

```text
obj-$(CONFIG_SAMPLES)	+= samples/
obj-$(CONFIG_NET)	    += net/
obj-y			        += virt/
obj-y			        += $(ARCH_DRIVERS)
obj-y                   += encouragement/
```

b) Check the Makefiles for the directories listed at the end of Kbuild file and create a Makefile
for your encouragement directory.

```shell
touch Makefile
```

```text
# Makefile of J H Park

obj-y := encouragement.o
```

#### 4. System call registration.

a) Add your new system call to `syscalls.h`.

Hint: there are more than one such file, make sure to edit the correct one!

Correct position at `/include/linux/syscalls.h` in my M3 Mac will be ARM64.
However, `cat arch/aarch64/include/asm/syscalls.h` does not exist.
Only `cat arch/arm/include/asm/syscall.h` exist.

```shell
uname -m
aarch64
cat arch/arm64/include/asm/syscall
syscall.h          syscall_wrapper.h
cat arch/arm/include/asm/syscalls.h
```

Instead of editing `arch/arm64/include/asm/syscall.h`

I edited `arch/arm64/include/asm/syscall.h `

```shell
 # nano arch/arm64/include/asm/syscall.h
nano include/linux/syscalls.h

asmlinkage long sys_encouragement(void);
```

b) Add your new system call to `syscall_64.tbl`.
Hint: what architecture is your Linux running on?

M3 Mac should set system call value in different position.

```shell
nano arch/arm64/kernel/syscall.c

#include <linux/kernel.h> // Included
#include <linux/syscalls.h> // Included

SYSCALL_DEFINE0(encouragement) {
    printk(KERN_INFO "Mum is proud of you!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

#### 5. Recompile the kernel and reboot (do not forget to update the bootloader).

Recompile

```shell
make -j$(nproc)
```

If modules are not installed install

```shell
make modules_install
make install
reboot
```

#### 6. Write a simple user space program to demonstrate the well functioning of your system call.

This is program.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/syscall.h>

int main() {
    long result = syscall(438);
    printf("Syscall returned: %ld\n", result);
    return 0;
}
```

If kernel reaches storage issue

```shell
df -h
make clean
make mrproper
df -h
```
