# Assignment VIII

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

## Exercise 1 - Input/Output

### 1. Is it possible to scan a document and send it through a wireless network at full speed? Explain why, why not.

It is theoretically possible depends on system bottleneck.
Factors are scan resolution, scanner scan speed, and bandwidth of wireless network.
If network speed is faster than scanner output rate, scan time will be fine.
However, delays like image compression will prevent to send data to full speed of wireless network.

### 2. How can an OS facilitate the installation of a new device without any need to recompile the OS or even to reboot it?

OS can use modular designs to dynamically load device drivers.
When new device is connected, OS will detect device by plug and play mechanism.
Then, load the appropriate driver without requiring any reboot or recompile.

### 3. In the slides four I/O software layers are listed; in which layers are the following operations done:

- a) Computing the track, sector, and head for a disk read -> Device Driver Layer
- b) Writing command to the device registers -> Hardware Layer
- c) Checking if the user is allowed to use the device -> User Level Software Layer or OS Layer
- d) Converting binary integers to ASCII for printing -> User Level Software Layer

### A DMA controller has four channels. The controller is able to request a 32bit word every 100 `nsec`.

**A response takes equally long. How fats should the bus be in order to avoid being a bottleneck?**

DMA controller request and response per 100`ns` for 32-bit words.
Bus support speed $\frac{32 `bits`}{100 `ns`} = 320$MB/`sec` = 40 MB/`sec`
to avoid bottleneck.

### 5. Briefly explain what a thin client is.

Thin client is lightweight computer system.
It mostly relies on server to process and store data.
It is primarily used for application access, data, or remote desktop.

### 6. Describe how a hard disk is working and give a few details regarding its geometry.

Hard disk can store a large quantity of data in a huge scale by platters.
Each platter is divided by tracks, and each track is divided by sectors.
The read/write head

### 7. What are differences between RAID 0, 1, 5, 6, and 10?

- RAID 0 - Stripe without redundancy, fast, no fault tolerance
- RAID 1 - Stripe with redundancy, mirroring
- RAID 5 - Stripe with distributed parity, need at minimum 3 disks.
- RAID 6 - Stripe with distributed dual parity, can handle 2 disk failures
- RAID 10 Combine RAID 0 and 1, high performance by mirroring and stripe without redundancy

## Exercise 2 - Multiprocessors

### 1. Suppose that the TSL instruction was not available for synchronizing a multiprocessor.

**Instead, another instruction, SWP was provided that atomically swapped the contents of a register with a
word in memory. How could that be used to provide multiprocessor synchronisation?**

The `SWP` instruction could swap register by lock with memory allocation easily.
If lock is free, SWAP will lock variable to ensure mutual exclusion.

### 2. Briefly describe virtualization and the main challenges that need to be overcome.

Virtualization make several operating systems to run in one physical PC.
However, resource allocation and isolation would be key technological challenges.
Specifically, CPU scheduling, I/O virtualization, and security isolation will be important.

## Exercise 3 - File systems

### 1. Assuming the current working directory is `/usr/share/doc/mutt/examples`

what is the absolute path of `../../../doc/../../lib/mutt`?

`/usr/share/doc/mutt/examples` to `../../../doc` is `/usr/share/doc`.
`/usr/share/doc` to `../../lib/mutt` is `/usr/lib/mutt`
Thus, absolute path will be `/usr/lib/mutt`.

### 2. A Unix system has 1KB blocks and 4B disk addresses.

**What is the maximum file size if i-nodes contain 13 direct entries,
and one single, double , and triple indirect entry each?**

Each block can hold $\frac{1KB}{4KB}=256$ addresses.

- Direct entries are $13 \times 1KB = 13KB$
- Single Indirect Entry $256 \times 1KB = 256KB$
- Double Indirect Entry $256 \times 256 \times 1KB = 65536KB = 64MB$
- Triple Indirect Entry $256 \times 256 \times 256 \times 1KB = 16777216MB = 16384MB = 16GB$
- Maximum File Size $13KB + 256KB + 64MB + 16GB = 16448.2627 MB = 16.06GB$

### 3. The time required to read a certain number of bytes can be approximated by summing the seek, rotation delay, and transfer times.

**Given a disk with mean seek time of 8 msec, a rotation rate
of 15,000 rpm and 262,144 bytes per track what are the data rates for block sizes of**

- (i) 1 KB,
- (ii) 2 KB, and
- (iii) 4 KB?

Parameters Provided

- Mean seek time = $ 8 \, \text{ms} $
- Rotation time per revolution = $ \frac{1}{15,000} \times 60,000 = 4 \, \text{ms} $
- Bytes per track = $ 262,144 \, \text{bytes} $

**Transfer Time Formula:**  
$ \text{Transfer Time} = \frac{\text{Block Size}}{\text{Bytes per Track}} \times 4 \, \text{ms} $

#### (i) Block Size = 1 KB ($ 1,024 \, \text{bytes} $)

- Transfer Time = $ \frac{1,024}{262,144} \times 4 \approx 0.0156 \, \text{ms} $
- Total Time = $ 8 + 4 + 0.0156 = 12.0156 \, \text{ms} $
- Data Rate = $ \frac{1,024 \, \text{bytes}}{12.0156 \, \text{ms}} \approx 85.2 \, \text{KB/s} $.

#### (ii) Block Size = 2 KB ($ 2,048 \, \text{bytes} $)

- Transfer Time = $ \frac{2,048}{262,144} \times 4 \approx 0.0312 \, \text{ms} $
- Total Time = $ 8 + 4 + 0.0312 = 12.0312 \, \text{ms} $
- Data Rate = $ \frac{2,048 \, \text{bytes}}{12.0312 \, \text{ms}} \approx 170.3 \, \text{KB/s} $.

#### (iii) Block Size = 4 KB ($ 4,096 \, \text{bytes} $)

- Transfer Time = $ \frac{4,096}{262,144} \times 4 \approx 0.0624 \, \text{ms} $
- Total Time = $ 8 + 4 + 0.0624 = 12.0624 \, \text{ms} $
- Data Rate = $ \frac{4,096 \, \text{bytes}}{12.0624 \, \text{ms}} \approx 339.7 \, \text{KB/s} $.

## Exercise 4 - Security

### 1. If using only lowercase letters how many possible 8 letter words can be chosen?

**Explain why a password should always contain lower and uppercase letters, numbers and symbols.**

8 Character Word, use only lowercase letters, 26 probabilities per each character.  
Possible combination likelihood will be $26^8 = 208827064576$ cases.

It is important to contain lower case, upper case letter, number, and symbols because
it will increment probability of password search space exponentially.
Entropy of password increases, so brute Force attack will be more resource unlikely.
For instance, uppercase multiplies twice probability per character, $2^8=256$ times for 8 characters.

### 2. Explain why memory dynamically allocated using malloc is sometimes random and some other times set to 0.

Memory allocation by `malloc` does not initialize memory.
It reserves size but may return memory with no leftover values from previous use, while `calloc` explicitly initialize to 0.  
If `calloc` is called, or memory is initialized explicitly, checking whether memory start is 0 or not is crucial.

### 3. A computer system is made of several components each featuring a different level of security. How secure is this system?

Computer system security is same as the most vulnerable part of the computer system.
Attackers might detect and exploit the least secure component so that entire system is under attack.
For instance, old firmware security vulnerability might be a trigger to compromise the entire OS,
that has no security problem in the OS.
Defense in depth strategies are minor ways to support weakest vulnerabilities.

### 4. Can security be achieved? Explain your answer.

Even theoretically, accomplishment of computer system to secure 100% perfect security is not achievable
considering the complexity of computer system and its continuous technological progress.
In some perspective, some super computer that does not exist in real world might make
all computer systems insecure by brute force.
In reality, it is even harder, due to several updates, conflicts, computer external problems like
electricity supply or network, human mistakes, etc. So, people generally compromise by
implementation of defence layer, regular updates, access controls, and continuous monitor.

## Exercise 5 - Research

**Write about half a page on the topic of firewalls on Linux systems; include information on iptables.
Do not forget to reference your sources of information.**

In Linux Operating System, Firewalls manage and secure network traffic by controlling incoming and
outgoing traffic based on predefined rules. It could protect against not authorized access and attacks.
Firewall acts as barrier located between trusted networks and untrusted networks.
It protects system access from unauthorized access, so that attacks and data breaches are prevented.

Firework analyze packets and decide whether they are allowed by defined rules including:

- IP Address : allow or block traffic from specific source or destination
- Port Numbers : Filter by services (Block SSH by block port 22)
- Protocols : Protocol type based filtering like TCP or UDP

There are several types of firewalls available.

- Packet Filtering Firewall work at network layer to inspect each individual packet, regardless of connection status.
- Stateful Firewall could work and track connection status to make more context aware decisions
- Application Firewall inspect packet contents in application layer
- Proxy Firewalls act between server and client to mask internal network

One of the most commonly applied tool on Linux firewall is `iptables`.
It is a part of the `netfilter` framework inside Linux OS kernel.
It could operate on chains including `INPUT`, `OUTPUT`, and `FORWARD` so that
traffic filtering is possible through IO address, ports, or protocols.

Administrator access could allow and block network traffic by making `iptables` rules.
For example, following command can be used to prevent any SSH traffic on part 22.

```shell
sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j DROP
```

Even though `nftables`, more recent version that provide higher performance and better usability,
`iptables` are still used in some modern distributions due to its stability and reliability.
Additional tools like Uncomplicated Firewall (UFU) and firewalld support interfaces that are
friendly for users to manage firewall rules, sot that complexity of iptables is in abstract.

Although firewalls are powerful and have several functionalities,
their limitation would be due to its subordinate part of layered security approach as
some framework or tool than could be part of consistent update and intrusion detection systems (IDS).

### References

- [Linux Foundation. "iptables Documentation."](linuxfoundation.org)
- [Red Hat. "Introduction to Firewalld and iptables."](redhat.com)
- [Ubuntu Documentation. "Uncomplicated Firewall (UFW)."](ubuntu.com)
- [Netfilter Project. "nftables Overview."](netfilter.org)
- [Iptables HowTo.](https://linux.die.net)
- [Introduction to nftables](https://wiki.nftables.org)
