# Assignment III

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Exercise 1 - General questions

#### Exercise 1.1 If a multithreaded process forks, a problem occurs if the child gets copies of all the parent's threads.

Suppose that one of the original threads was waiting for keyboard input. Now two threads are
waiting for keyboard input, one in each process. Does this problem ever occur in single-threaded
processes?

NO. In single thread, `fork()` call of process id will receive child process as
copy of single thread. Only one process can wait for input. Thus,
it is not likely for single thread CPU to have this kind of duplicated input
acquisition.

#### Exercise 1.2 Many UNIX system calls have no Win32 API equivalents.

For each such call, what are the consequences when porting a program from a UNIX system to a Windows system?

Some OS concepts in UNIX exist in WIN32 too, but their commands are different,
such as process generation command `fork()` is either in Windows threads or
`CreateProcess()` function. So, UNIX command is mostly incompatible.
Thus, consequences when porting a program from a UNIX system to a Windows system
will be unlikely to work due to incompatible calls.

### Exercise 2 - C programming - The code of this exercise will be reused in future labs

The goal of this exercise is to improve the programming skills and get more familiar with pointers and
function pointers.

1. Implement a linked list structure containing two pointers of type char and void. It should be
   possible to at least add elements to the list.
2. Knowing that the void pointer in the structure could contain some char\*, int, or double, write a
   search function for this linked list.
3. The linked list will store elements read from an ASCII file where each line is in the format
   `somestring=somedata`. The type of the data is defined in the filename; for instance a file
   containing unsorted integers will be named rand_int.txt. Implement the necessary functions to
   read and write such files.
4. Use a function pointers to compare and sort the elements from the structure with respect to the
   data field. Implement the following sorting orders: increasing, decreasing, and random. The
   filename is `sortingtype_dataype.txt`, where `sortingtype` is rand, inc, or dec.s
5. Write a function to test the implementation.

Sample output, test on JOJ using `git commit -m "joj.h3`

```shell
git add .
git commit --allow-empty -m "test(h3): joj"
git push
clang-18 -std=gnu17 -O2 -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic -Wno-unused-result -Wconversion -Wvla main.c -o h3
./h3 rand_int.txt inc
```

File name structure `[Sort Type]_[Data Type].txt`

### Ex. 3 - Research on POSIX

Write a few paragraphs about the POSIX standards. What are they, why do they exist, what kind of
things are included in the norms.

POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface) is IEEE standard designed for
OS compatibility. It defines API and Interface of OS to be conventional
primarily targeting UNIX based systems. Not only Linux and MacOS but also
even Microsoft Windows can offer some POSIX compatibility based on
Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).

During the warring states of OS, a lot of OS emerged and competed against
each other. Almost all of them had different form of commands, functions,
system calls, and utilities without any compatibility. This made programmers
to make different codes of system call for each OS, making it extremely
inefficient. POSIX standard application in OS industry promised way much
portable software for all software programs in different OS.

POSIX standard has several key concepts.

1. System Calls for process creation`fork()`, execution`exec()`, and termination `exit()`, `kill()`.
2. File IO (input output) stream operations `read()`, `write()`, permissions, directory functions `opendir()`, `readdir()`.
3. Multi Threading APIs like POSIX Threads or Pthreads
4. IPC (Inter Process Communication) and Process Management lik `pipe()`
5. Network Standards including socket based communication
6. Command Line Interface basic functions like `ls`, `cd`, `grep`, `awk`, `sed`, etc...
7. Shell Script standards

POSIX allow compatible software for different OS, so code portability is way much better,
and programmers don't need to make software for each different Operating Systems.
