# Assignment I

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Exercise 1 Review

Explain the difference between the stack and the heap.

Computer can allocate memory in two possible ways: Stack and Heap allocation.

| Feature               | Stack                               | Heap                                |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| **Memory Allocation** | Static, handled automatically       | Dynamic, handled manually           |
| **Memory Management** | Managed by the system               | Managed by the programmer           |
| **Data Structure**    | FILO (First In Last Out)            | Tree Structure                      |
| **Access Speed**      | Relatively Faster                   | Relatively Slower                   |
| **Lifetime**          | Tied to function call (short-lived) | Flexible, persists until freed      |
| **Size Limit**        | Limited, generally 1-8 MB           | Larger, limited by available memory |
| **Error Types**       | Stack Overflow                      | Memory Leakage                      |
| **Example**           | `int x = 10;` (Local Variable)      | `int* x = malloc(sizeof(int));`     |

Since the order of programming in C/C++ is defined, putting all variables in linear order will not cause problem.
Thus, in static memory allocation, static variables can be handled by Stack in order of function call.
However, dynamic memory allocation means variables can be created or removed directly.
So, linear data structure is not available to manage order of variables, so heap data structure is more likely.

### Exercise 2 Personal research

#### 2.1 Briefly explain what operations are performed when a computer is powered on.

When the computer is powered on, 4 steps are followed.

1. POST (Power On Self Test) will test computer hardware before OS is loaded.
2. BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) initialize and control basic hardware components including monitor, keyboard, HDD.
3. Bootloader is located from Motherboard attached storage by BIOS
4. OS kernel is loaded by bootloader so that OS can control bootloader now.

**What is the role of the BIOS and how does it interact with the OS?**

1. Initialize hardware components and check their functionality before OS loading.
2. Boot processing will locate and load bootloader from storage.
3. When bootloader launches OS, BIOS still runs on background to support features that might be useful to OS.

#### 2.2 In a few words explain what are hybrid and exo kernels.

**Monolithic** Kernel is simple kernel form, so that both user and kernel are in same address.
Since user and kernel use same space, process speed is faster, architecture is simple
and flexible. However, entire volume of OS and kernel will be in large scale, making
OS unstable and insecure.
Linux, UNIX are common examples.

**Microkernel** divides user space and kernel space. Thus, it is more secure and stable.
Also, it will use relatively less amount of volume.
However, since user and kernel will be divided, architecture is complicated and
integration of kernel and user have several inconveniences.
Also, several functions available on monolithic kernel might be limited.
Minix is example.

**Hybrid Kernel** is a combination of two kernel architecture above with smaller kernel volume.
It has more various functions than microkernel, but still has less functions than monolithic kernel.
Also, architecture design will be even more complicated than monolithic kernel.
Microsoft Windows is example.

**Exo Kernel** is currently in research by UC Berkeley rather than utilized in industries.
It is developed concept based on monolithic kernel, with better speed and security.
However, architecture will be more sophisticated, with potentially inefficient use
of computer resources.

### Exercise 3 Course Application

#### 3.1 Which of the following instructions should only be allowed in kernel mode? Explain.

- a) Disable all interrupts
- b) Read the time-of-day clock
- c) Set the time-of-day clock
- d) Change the memory map

(b) is allowed in both user mode and kernel mode.
(a), (c), (d) are allowed only in kernel mode.

Disabling all interruption in OS pipeline must be handled by kernel, since it will be
entire reset of the process pipeline. User should not have full comprehension and
access of the entire OS.

Read the time of the day can be done in user level, especially considering the different
time zone shared globally by several users. Basic time might be setup into UTC 0, and
additional time zone calculation can be done for each user mode.

However, set the time of the day must be in kernel level. Time is very closely
related to the entire process of the Operating System and its logs. Thus, user level
time clock setup should be prohibited.

Memory map is also directly related to the operating system. Data structure of stack
and heap to store each kind of memory should be handled under entire kernel.
Thus, user level memory map access might compromise the running process of entire OS.

#### 3.2 Consider a system that has two CPUs and each CPU is composed of two threads.

Suppose three programs, P0, P1, and P2, are started with run times of 5, 10 and 20 ms, respectively.
How long will it take to complete the execution of these programs?
Assume that all three programs are 100% CPU bound, do not block during execution,
and do not change CPUs once assigned.

There are 2 CPUs, and 2 threads per 1 CPU, thus 4 threads exist. One thread can handle
one process simultaneously, so all three programs P0, P1, and P2 are able to start
simultaneously without waiting for thread scarcity.

Execution time for each program will be P0 5ms, P1 10ms, P2 25ms.
If each thread take each task simultaneously,
P2 end time `25ms` will be complete time.
Suppose core can take each task simultaneously.
If program execution is optimized, P0 and P2 will
be assigned together, so that P1 will start after
P0 ends, resulting in same `25ms`. However, if
programs execution list is in FIFO queue order, then
it will take `30ms` since core handling.
In worst case, if all projects require 2 cores,
then time consumption will be `40ms`.

### Exercise 4 Command lines on a Unix system

On Linux use the command line to:

1. Create a new user;
2. List all the currently running processes;
3. Display the characteristics of the CPU and the available memory;
4. Redirect random output read from a system device, into two different files;
5. Concatenate the two previous files;
6. Read the content of the resulting file as hexadecimal values (in other words find a command to
   read a file as hexadecimal values);
7. Go at the root of the kernel source you downloaded in l2 and use a single command to find all
   the files in with the word mutex in their name and containing the whole word nest_lock;

**Note**: follow the “programming exercises” guidelines and save the list of commands in a shell file (.sh).

Shell commandlines in `e4.sh` file.

### Exercise 5 Simple problem

One reason GUIs were initially slow to be adopted was the cost of the hardware needed to support them.
How much video RAM is needed to support a 25 lines by 80 rows character monochrome text screen?
How much for a 1024 x 768 pixel 24-bit color bitmap? Assuming the cost of this RAM in the 1980es
was $5/KB what was the price of those two solutions? How much is it now?

Monochrome text character is ASCII, 2^8=256 bits, 1 byte per each character.
The calculation will be 25 X 80 = 2000 Bytes = 2 KB

One pixel is composed of 3 RGB values, each value from 0 to 255.
It is 1 byte per each color, so 3 bytes per each pixel.
Total memory required per each screen will be
3 X 1024 X 768 = 2359296 Bytes / 1024 = 2304 KB / 1024 = 2.25 MB

In 1980, dealing 1024 X 768 RGB pixels represented
2304 KB X 5 $ = 11520 USD. Ignoring inflation for 40 years,
this is enough to buy the 275 latest SK Hynix DDR5 16GB RAM,
currently 42 USD per each in Amazon, for 2024 October.

However, currently abandoned computers in school with 2GB RAM
will be far more than enough to handle 3MB memory.
