# Assignment IV

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Exercise 1 Simple questions

#### 1.

> Consider a system in which threads are implemented entirely in user space, with the run-time
> system getting a clock interrupt once a second. Suppose that a clock interrupt occurs while some
> thread is executing in the run-time system. What problem might occur? Can you suggest a way
> to solve it?

Thread control data corruption is likely if system runtime is during thread update including thread status,
program counter, or stack pointer. Clock interruption might compromise thread data structure.
Also, interruption handling malfunction might also happen. Implementation of interrupt masking in
runtime system can solve this issue, since it will basically prohibit interruption temporarily
during thread process that would compromise system is not finished.
Once these operations are complete, the interrupts can be enabled again.
This approach will ensure no interruption during thread processes that might damage if stopped without finish.

#### 2.

> Suppose that an operating system does not have anything like the select system call (man select
> for more details on the command) to see in advance if it is safe to read from a file, pipe, or
> device, but it does allow alarm clocks to be set that interrupt blocked system calls. Is it possible
> to implement a threads package in user space under these conditions? Discuss.

It is possible to implement a threads package in user space under conditions without any commands
similar to `select` system call. It is important to remember that blocked threads are not blocking entire process.
Kernel manages all processes, but they are not controlling each thread.
It will be impossible to check whether file or pipe are ready to be used during Input / Output, without `select()` function.
However, `alarm clock` can be used to get worktime in the following order.

1. Thread request to read from file or pipe
2. Runtime system call `read()`
3. If call blocks, alarm clock like `alarm()` or `settimer()` interrupt blocked system call
4. Receive alarm interrupt, runtime system save blocked thread status
5. Blocked thread switch to another thread
6. Original thread retry IO operation

Even though this clock using approach wastes resource for counting times for each process I/O,
this method will successfully prevent process blocking during I/O by thread switch.

### Exercise 2 Race condition in Bash

> Write a Bash script which generates a file composed of one integer per line. The script should read the
> last number in the file, add one to it, and append the result to the file.

#### 1. Run the script in both background and foreground at the same time. How long does it take before observing a race condition?

Code implemented at `h4/ex2.sh`. Foreground on front line and background on back line.

```shell
# If file does not exist create starting with 0
if [ ! -f counter.txt ]; then
    echo 0 > counter.txt
fi

# Read the last number from the file
last_num=$(tail -n 1 counter.txt)

# Create new number incremented one from last number
new_num=$((last_num + 1))

# Append new number to result
echo $new_num >> counter.txt
```

Foreground Terminal

```shell
chmod +x ex2.sh
./ex2.sh
```

Background Terminal

```shell
while true; do ./ex2.sh & sleep 0.1; done
```

The background terminal will iterate to execute `ex2.sh` forever until it is interrupted.

#### 2. Modify the script such as to prevent the race condition.

Code implementation to lock infinite loop is required.

```shell
# Flock usage, only one process write to file at same time
exec 200>counter.txt.lock      # Create or open lock file
flock -n 200 || exit 1         # Get lock, exit if locked
```

Added the following lines of code to implement lock.

### Exercise 3 Programming with semaphores

The following C code creates two threads which increment a common global variable. When run it
generates a random and inaccurate output. In order to solve this problem we want to use semaphores.

1. On Linux, find the file semaphore.h.
2. Read the documentation to understand how to use the functions described in the file `semaphore.h`.
3. Using semaphores adjust the program such as to always return the correct answer.

```shell
find /usr/include -name semaphore.h
/usr/include/semaphore.h
cat /usr/include/semaphore.h
```

Semaphore file attached as `semaphore.h` in folder.

[The GNU C Library (glibc) manual Semaphore](https://sourceware.org/glibc/manual/2.40/html_mono/libc.html#Semaphores)

Linux shell manual check by following command

```shell
man sem_init
man sem_wait
```

Semaphore code to always return the correct answer is in `semaphore.c` file.

```shell
clang-18 -std=gnu17 -O2 -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic -Wno-unused-result -Wconversion -Wvla code.c -o code
```
