# Assignment V

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Ex. 1 ??Simple questions

**1. A system has two processes and three identical resources. Each process needs a maximum of two resources. Can a deadlock occur? Explain.**

Deadlock can occur in the following circumstances.

1. Mutual Exclusion
2. Hold and Wait
3. No Preemption
4. Circular Wait

System has two processes and one process can handle maximum 2 resources, meaning that
the entire system can handle maximum 4 resources. Each process require maximum 2 resources.
However, only 3 resources exist in current circumstance.
Thus, since process capability of system is not full, deadlock is NOT going to occur.

**2. A computer has six tape drives, with n processes competing for them. Each process may need two drives. For which values of n is the system deadlock free?**

Similar to the answer made at previous problem,
System might potentially have deadlock at least $n \geq 6$.
Thus, if $n \in {1,2,3,4,5}$, then deadlock is not likely to happen.

**3. A real-time system has four periodic events with periods of 50, 100, 200, and 250 msec each.
Suppose the four events require 35, 20, 10, and x msec of CPU time, respectively. What is the
largest value x for which the system is schedulable?**

$\frac{35}{50} + \frac{20}{100} + \frac{10}{200} + \frac{x}{250} < 1$

$0.95 + \frac{x}{250} < 1 \implies \frac{x}{250} < 0.05 \implies x < 12.5$

Thus, 12.5 will be maximum.

**4. Round-robin schedulers normally maintain a list of all runnable processes, with each process occurring
exactly once in the list. What would happen if a process occurred more than once in the
list? Would there be any reason for allowing this?**

If same process occurred more than once, then CPU Time will be allocated more to that process.

**5. Can a measure of whether a process is likely to be CPU bound or I/O bound be detected by
analyzing the source code. How to determine it at runtime?**

CPU bound process is heavily composed of computation.

Input Output bound is literally handling reading input and writing output of files.

### Exercise 2 ??Deadlocks

Assuming three resources consider the following snapshot of a system.

| Process | Allocated | Maximum | Available |
| ------- | --------- | ------- | --------- |
| P1      | 010       | 753     | 332       |
| P2      | 200       | 322     |           |
| P3      | 302       | 902     |           |
| P4      | 211       | 222     |           |
| P5      | 002       | 433     |           |

**1. Determine the content of the Request matrix.**

$
\begin{bmatrix}
7 & 4 & 3 \\
1 & 2 & 2 \\
6 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 1 \\
4 & 3 & 1 \\
\end{bmatrix}
$

**2. Is the system in a safe state?**

Banker's algorithm should be used to check system status safety.
Available resources are $[3,3,2]$.

$P4=(0,1,1) \rightarrow (3 + 2, 3 + 1, 2 + 1) = (5, 4, 3)$

$P2=(1,2,2) \rightarrow (5 + 2, 4 + 0, 3 + 0) = (7, 4, 3)$

$P1=(7,4,3) \rightarrow  (7 + 0, 4 + 1, 3 + 0) = (7, 5, 3)$

$P3=(6,0,0) \rightarrow (7 + 3, 5 + 0, 3 + 2) = (10, 5, 5)$

$P5=(10, 5, 5) \rightarrow (10 + 0, 5 + 0, 5 + 2) = (10, 5, 5)$

**3. Can all the processes be completed without the system being in an unsafe state at any stage?**

Yes. Sequence will be
$P4 \rightarrow P2 \rightarrow P1 \rightarrow P3 \rightarrow P5$
with no safety vulnerable part.

### Ex. 3 ??The reader-writer problem

In the reader-writer problem, some data could be accessed for reading but also sometimes for writing.
When processes want to read the data they get a read lock and a write lock for writing. Multiple processes
could get a read lock at the same time while a write lock should prevent anybody else from reading or
writing the data until the write lock is released.

To solve the problem we decide to use a global variable count together with two semaphores: count_lock
for locking the count variable, and db_lock for locking the database. To get a write lock we can proceed
as follows:

```c
void write_lock() {
    down(db_lock);
}

void write_unlock() {
    up(db_lock);
}
```

**1. Explain how to get a read lock, and write the corresponding pseudocode.**

Counter for counting active readers number is required.
When reader start, increase count.
For first reader, lock database.
If reader ends, decrease count.
If it is last reader, release db lock.
This is following pseudocode.

```c++
void read_lock(){
    down(count_lock);
    if(count == 0) down(db_lock); // First reader lock databas e
    count++;
    up(count_lock);
}

void read_unlock(){
    down(count_lock);
    count--;
    if(count==0) up(db_lock); // Last reader unlocks the database
    up(count_lock);
}
```

**2. Describe what is happening if many readers request a lock.**

When several lock request is made by several readers, then
each reader could increase count and only first reader will lock database.
Every following readers could skip database lock.
Block any new reader when a writer becomes available.

**3. Explain how to implement this idea using another semaphore called read_lock.**

Prevent writer to unclearly handle reader influx by using semaphore `read lock`.
This blocks new readers and allow readers to operate properly.

```c++
void read_lock() {
    down(read_lock); // New reader prevention
    down(count_lock);
    if(count == 0) down(db_lock);
    count++;
    up(count_lock);
    up(read_lock);
}

void read_unlock() {
    down(count_lock);
    count--;
    if(count==0) up(db_lock);
    up(count_lock);
}
```

**4. Is this solution giving any unfair priority to the writer or the reader? Can the problem be considered as solved?**

Since this solution prohibits new readers to start, it will primarily process writer if resource gets available.
It will prevent writer starving, but it causes reader starving instead.
Thus, balancing resources for both read and write will be more applicable.
Queue or algorithm implementation will be required to give 'fair' priority for both writer and reader.
