# Lab 05

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### 1 Project 2: presentations (part 1)

> To ensure a more synchronised support during project 2, presentations are split into two parts. Topics
> are available on Canvas and their selection is on a first come first served basis.
> Please well prepare your presentation and ask questions on others??research. This should greatly help in
> the development of your Database system. Be careful, Mr. Frown might be listening!

### 2 Layer programming

> When writing code one of the most important goal is flexibility. In particular it should be possible to alter
> part of the program without having to rewrite everything. For instance in the case of a music player
> the part of the code in charge of opening a file, decoding it, and sending it to the sound card should be
> totally independent from the Graphical User Interface (GUI). If this is not the case, changing the toolkit
> used to build the GUI will impact the core functionalities of the program, leading to a complete rewriting
> of the software. On the other hand if the various components are developed with layers in mind, the GUI
> will be implemented as top layer such that altering it will not impact the lower layers in charge of the
> player?셲 core functionalities.

Basic principles in layer programming:

- A function may not call a function from any higher layer;
- A function can only issue calls to functions from a same or a lower layer.

We now refer to exercise 2 from homework 3 as an example on how to write code using layers.

#### The program can be divided into three layers, what are they?

Since it is layer of function, it is supposed to be structural rather than function based division
composed of read, sort, write.

Core Data Structure Layer includes linked list structure including generation,
node memory allocation, free, list insertion, and other functions.

Application Function Logic Layer will include acquisition of data type, sorting type, value search, etc.
Sorting list will be categorized as close to data structure though.

User Interface Layer handles Input Output redirection of the code, parsing input file and arguments and
generating output text file. These are the most external layer, so related codes will be in `main.c`.

#### Programming part

- Create the appropriate corresponding header files.
- If necessary rewrite functions such that no call is emitted from lower level functions to upper level
  functions.
- The initial program implements a command line interface, write a ?쏮enu interface??which (i) welcomes the user, (ii) prompts him for some task to perform, and (iii) runs it. When a task is
  completed the user should (i) be informed if it was successful and then (ii) be displayed the menu.
  From the menu he should be able to exit the program.
- Write two main functions, one which will ?쐂ispatch??the work to another function which will run
  the command line user interface and a second one which will ?쐂ispatch??the work to the Menu user
  interface.

Codes in `ex2` folder.

Core data structure including node and list are inside `list.c` file.
Application function including read sort write are inside `util.c` file.
User interface layer is `main.c` file that could be implemented further.

```shell
clang-18 -std=gnu17 -O2 -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic -Wno-unused-result -Wconversion -Wvla main.c list.c util.c -o ex2
./ex2
```

Compiled successfully.

The initial program implements a command line interface, write a ?쏮enu interface??which
(i) welcomes the user,
(ii) prompts him for some task to perform, and
(iii) runs it.
When a task is completed the user should
(i) be informed if it was successful and then
(ii) be displayed the menu.
From the menu he should be able to exit the program.

Write two main functions,

one which will ?쐂ispatch??the work to another function which will run the command line user interface and
a second one which will ?쐂ispatch??the work to the Menu user interface.

### 3 Libraries

In order to understand libraries we first recall a few basics on compilation.

- What are the four stages performed when compiling a file?
- Briefly describe each of them.

Four stages

1. `Preprocess` handles macros and directives including `#include`, `#define`, and `#ifdef`.
2. `Compile` macro handle code is compiled and translated to assembly code file like `.s` file.
3. `Assembly` code generated will be converted to machine code like object file like `.o` or `obj` file.
4. `Link` will combine every object files created from assembly step into executable file like ELF file for UNIX system.

A library is a collection of functions, data types, constants, etc. which are put together. When compiling,
the machine code corresponding to those elements is generated. Two types of libraries exist: static and
dynamic. Explain the difference between the two.
Generating a static library is a simple process: collect several functions and pack them into an ar archive.

- Search more details on how to proceed.
- Create two static libraries, one for each of the two lowest layers in the previous program.
- Compile the command line version of the program using these two static libraries.

A `static` library that typically start with `.a` on UNIX and `.lib` on Windows OS contains code
directly link and compile code to execute during linking stage of file compile.
These static libraries are embedded into computer system, so there is no reason to use external
libraries, but more static library in Os means larger system file size, since library code will
be duplicated per program using them.

A `dynamic` library that typically start with `.so` on UNIX or `.dll` in Windows OS contains code
that are loaded in linking stage of runtime instead of compile time. Since they have dynamic libraries,
several programs could share same dynamic libraries without duplication. This reduces memory usage and
disk space, but instead existence of dynamic libraries should be guaranteed.

> Generating shared, or dynamic, libraries is a slightly more complex process. Since the library is to be shared
> among various programs none of them can rely on a predefined location where to find the functions in
> the memory. Therefore, as the library has to store its information at different memory addresses it is
> compiled into a Position-Independent Code (PIC). This is achieved by running gcc with the flag -fpic.
> Then in order to effectively create the dynamic library, gcc has to be re-run with the flag -shared.

- Generate two dynamic libraries, one for each of the two lowest layers in the previous program.
- Compile the whole program
- Compile the Menu version of the program using these two dynamic libraries.

Two lowest layers

A few extra remarks:

- What is the difference between a library and the API.
- Implement the API below for the two libraries.
- Test on JOJ using > git commit -m"joj.l5" .

A `Library` is all codes compiled for program execution including function, datatype, etc.
They are reusable for several programs, so resources will be reduced compared to embedded code.

An `API` stands for Application Programming Interface. It can select methods and rules of functions and processes
to be called. The API will act as some form of code interface for programmers.

```shell
clang-18 -std=gnu17 -O2 -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic -Wno-unused-result -Wconversion -Wvla lab5_dlist.c -o ex3
./ex3
git add .
git commit --allow-empty -m "test(l5): joj"
git push
```
