# Lab 06

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Project 2: presentations (part 2)

Presentation Part 2

### Plugin based software development

While layer programming is very important and useful to keep the code clean and well organised, the
introduction of a plugin structure can greatly enhance and ease the software development process.
From a simplified informal point of view a plugin can be seen as a small piece of software that can be
loaded to extend or bring in new features to a host application. For this to work, the host software
must expose a plugin API. Then plugins can be develop independently from each others or the main
application, i.e. the core software does not need them to compile and run properly. Plugins can hence
be implemented following the plugin API, be compiled as shared libraries, and loaded at startup or even
at run-time by the host software.

For instance if developing a music player one might want to introduce plugins to play various file types
such as mp3, ogg, and flac. In such a case one will want to have a generic play_file() function which
would redirect the job to an appropriate function, for example play_mp3(), or play_ogg() depending on
the file type. Of course if a file type is not supported, e.g. play_flac() does not exist, the program should
not crash but simply report that this file type is not supported. In particular this shows the necessity for
each plugin to register itself and present some meta-information about itself to the main program.

One also notices that some functions can be defined as mandatory and others as optional. For instance
a flac music player plugin which does not have a play_flac() function should not be loaded, since this
function is mandatory to play a flac file. However some other functions such as read_id3_flac(), which
reads the id3 tag of a flac file, is not mandatory to play a file, so one can easily think of making it
optional. Hence this function should being missing should not prevent the plugin to load.
In a slightly more formal way the concept of plugin architecture splits into four sub-concepts:

Discovering: mechanisms allowing the host application to discover all available plugins; Usually plugins
are found in a specific folders, e.g. /usr/lib/application_name/plugins/, or $HOME/.local/share/
application_name/plugins;

Registering: mechanisms allowing the host application to potentially accept and register the discovered
plugins; At this stage a plugin announces its features, version, and any other information necessary
to the well functioning of the application;

Note: in practice discovering and registration and often performed at the same time.
Hooking: sometimes called mount points or extension points, applications hooks can be seen as the core
of the plugin manager; They allow the plugin to ?쏿ttach??itself to the application; Hence the core
application can get control over the plugin;

Exposing: the core application should also expose an API to plugins such that they can call some of
its functions; Evidently, not all functions from the core application should be accessible, cf. layer
programming; The set of such functions can be seen as the part of the plugin manager API that is
exposed to the plugins;

Note: it is possible, and even common, to have a plugin architectures allowing to write plugins in a
different language than the core application. For instance if the core application is written in C, plugins
do not necessarily require to be developed in C, other languages such as Python or Lua can be used. Of
course this requires more work on the plugin architecture design; This is not covered in this lab.

#### Plugin Architecture Design

File input output process plugin should be divided into three large components.

1. `open_fi le()` will open file and verify its format.
2. `process_file()` will read file data according to its type.
3. `close_file()` will close file and clean up resources.

#### Main Application Refactor

1. Plugin loads all available plugins from folder
2. Plugin will register supported file types for application
3. Plugin will replace current file opening code to function based on extension or identifier.

#### Opening & Processing Text Files

Create text file plugin that adhere to FilePlugin interface.
This plugin can manage text files by processing each line.
Sample code draft structure in `ex2.h`

### 3 Designing a plugin architecture

We now want to add a plugin infrastructure to exercise 2 of homework 3, based on the API defined in
lab 5. In the initial exercise a text file only contains one type of data, e.g. increasing integers. Lets say
that we now want our file to be in csv format, with each column containing a different type of data. For
instance a file could look like.

```csv
rand_int,rand_double,inc_char*
abc=123,bfc=43.5786,aa=cat
asda=54,sdfs=654.1,poi=dog
poqq=3,qa=0.12313,qkm=fish
```

Based on the rewritten implementation using the layer programming API:

- Design a plugin architecture allowing to open various file-types.
- Refactor the code of the main application such that opening a text file becomes part of a plugin.
- Adjust the code such that text files can opened and processed.
- Write the skeleton of a plugin to open and process csv files.

Skeleton code written in `ex3.h`
