# Lab 07

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### 1 Project 2: presentations (part 3)

### 2 Introduction

Finally, the weekend is here. Things start to be a bit tense at work with Mr. Frown who is always on
your back. It feels that things have worsened over the past few days, but you have no idea what could
be the problem. In this context a bit of time out with your friend Bob will definitely be much refreshing.
When you arrive at The Geeks’ Tavern on Friday night, Bob is already seating at the counter sipping a
beer. His mood is the total opposite of yours, while you feel disheartened and dejected, Bob seems to be
floating in happiness. As soon as he notices you, he walks to you and warmly hugs you. Before you can
say anything he announces: “You know what? I found the perfect job!”. As you silently listens to how
great and open his new company is, you cannot stop thinking of your own situation with Mr. Frown.
Why on earth did Bob find the perfect job and you are stuck at Lemonion Inc.? You had better grades
than him, so why him, not you?
Bob is your friend but sharing his joy is not that simple… As he notices your unusual attitude he inquires
about your own situation. An uncontrollable flow of words comes out of our mouth, explaining how mean
Mr. Frown is and how unrewarding your job is. Bob tries his best to comfort and encourage you, you
can even feel some flattery in his words. While you are thankful for his kindness and empathy, you still
would like to have a job like his. Unfortunately his line of work is slightly different from what you are
used to and more directly related to Operating Systems. He however promises to let you know as soon
as he hear of an opening in his perfect company, CoolZone IT solutions.
Reinvigorated by Bob’s words and encouragements, this is with a light heart that you join your parents
for Saturday lunch. You just want to relax and enjoy their company. As the discussion shifts to your
work at Lemonion Inc. you quickly summarise the current situation and emphasise your desire to do your
utmost to keep your job, despite Mr. Frown’s abuses. As your parents look concerned you tell them that
Bob might be able to help you find a better job, but you first need to refresh your memory on Operating
Systems.
The only good side is that although you have been here for already a couple of hours they have not yet
asked you when you will buy a flat and get married… Just as this idea draws a smile on your face, your
dad appears in the kitchen and orders you to stop drying up the dishes: he has something to show you.
A few years back he started a personal project to learn a bit more about filesystems. He designed a very
basic and simple inode-based filesystem for the Linux Operating System, and he suggests that you work
on it. Your dad seems very excited by the possibility to work with you and help you getting ready for a
prospective position at CoolZone IT solutions.

#### 3 Fixing Dadfs

As you arrive in front of the computer your dad connects to his git server and pull a repository called
dadfs. He tells you to start by reading the README file and follow the instructions to compile the code.
Unfortunately the code appears to be too old to compile with a new kernel. While you feel disappointed,
your father just says “Great!”. As you gaze at him wondering why the module not compiling is a good
news he goes into a great length of explanation on why this is a perfect exercise. You have rarely seen
him so excited, even your mum comes wondering what is happening!
From what you understand this is a perfect exercise to understand the structure of the code, how the
kernel works, what a module is, how to write backward compatible code, etc. It feels like the benefits
are endless. So without any further ado you grab the keyboard and start working, although this feels
awkward having both your parents in your back commenting your decisions as if you were still in grade 1.
To guide you in your work you dad asks you a few initial questions:

**1. What is a kernel module, and how does it differ from a regular library?**

The `Kernel module` code files let Linux kernel to be loaded so that linux kernel can use more functions without system reboot.
Kernel could directly handle OS and hardware, including FS(File Systems), networks, or driers.
On the other hand, `Regular Libraries` collect all precompiled functions and routines linked to user space.
Libraries are not loaded in kernel space, but in user space.
Thus, libraries are not able to access OS or hardware.

**2. How to compile a kernel module?
Before going for his nap your father reminds you of the importance of backward compatibility: “Even if
you code compiles with a new kernel, it should still compile on an old one, so do not delete all my work!”.
In a last encouragement before he leaves he blinks his right eye and smile at you before disappearing in
the corridor.
As you are left along with the code you decide to investigate it further and look at all the details of
this first Linux kernel source code. After a quick search on internet it appears that the kernel API has
changed since the initial code was written.**

Step 0 Install Kernel Headers, if not installed

```shell
sudo apt-get install linux-headers-$(uname -r)
```

Step 1 Write MakeFile. Example is below

```makefile
obj-m := dadfs.o
KDIR := /lib/modules/$(shell uname -r)/build
PWD := $(shell pwd)

all:
    $(MAKE) -C $(KDIR) M=$(PWD) modules

clean:
    $(MAKE) -C $(KDIR) M=$(PWD) clean
```

Step 2 Compile module by `make` command

```shell
make
```

Step 3 Insert and Load module

```shell
sudo insmod dadfs.ko
```

Step 4 Remove the Module

```shell
sudo rmmod dadfs
```

**3. How are mutex defined and used? How good is this approach? As he insists on the last question it
clearly appears that he expects an honest response, not just “Of course dad your code is perfect,
nobody can do better than you.”**

Mutexes, or mutual exclusives, are used to protect shared data structures during the multi thread environment.
There are serveral steps.

Step 0 : Define Mutex

Step 1 : Initialize Mutex

Step 2 : Lock to protect important section

Step 3 : Unlock if important section change is made

```c
mutex_init(&my_mutex);
mutex_lock(&my_mutex);
mutex_unlock(&my_mutex);
```

Mutex are really simple and efficient to manage inside thread context.
However, they are able to potentially cause deadlock, specifically when simultaneously locked
by twisted order or recursively locked. All threads will be in lock, so that entire mutex is dead.

**4. Based on the source code, how is information shared between the kernel and user spaces?**

Information share between kernel and user space is based on memory mapping, using `mmap` function.
Function `mmap` could map kernel memory or files into user space memory.
User space application is possible through kernel buffers with no system call repetition.
Also, for specific file systems including `procfs` that create entries in `/proc`
or `sysfs` to export kernel objects and attributed to the user spaces.

**5. Following dad’s advice ensure the part of the code the poses problem is only processed when working
with older kernels. At this stage nothing needs to be done for newer ones. Ensure the module
properly compiles on a newer kernel, although it cannot be of any use at this stage.**

Macro if statements commonly used like `#ifdef` can be used to ensure backward compatibility.
Kernel version can be handled by libraries inside headers like `<linux/version.h>`.

```c++
#include <linux/version.h>

#if LINUX_VERSION_CODE < KERNEL_VERSION(3, 12, 0)
static const struct file_operations dadfs_fops = {
    .read = old_read_function,
    .write = old_write_function,
};
#else
static const struct file_operations dadfs_fops = {
    .read = new_read_function,
    .write = new_write_function,
};
#endif
```
