# Lab 04

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Exercise 1 Database

This is the evening, you are exhausted after a long day of work on mumsh. So you decide to poke around
and learn more about database, as unfortunately you never had to opportunity to select such course
during your studies.

#### 1.1 Database creation

As a first step you need to find a database, you fire-up your web-browser. Unfortunately your internet is
very slow today so you cannot get much information. But after a bit of thinking you realise that you still
have a git version of the Linux kernel, and as you know everything about git you can easily generate logs
from the git commits. To ensure a proper formatting you refer to git pretty format documentation page.
So you open a terminal running mumsh and type a simple command line to test database generation.

```shell
mumsh $ git log --pretty="%H,%aN,%aI,%s" > db.csv
```

The goal being to get a basic introduction to database you only want to focus on basic queries, in
particular you do not need a very complicated database and in the end only generating two csv files1
containing the following fields is enough.

Fields for timestamp.csv:

- Hash of the commit
- Author name
- Author date, strict ISO 8601 format
- Author date, UNIX timestamp

Fields for db.csv:

- Hash of the commit
- Author name
- Subject

Enter command in the project 1 git repository folder to generate log of git commits.
To proceed the following assignment, it is necessary to get the git repository of the Linux.

```shell
cd cd /path/to/p1
git log --pretty="%H,%aN,%aI,%s" > commits.csv
cd /path/to/l4
```

- %H: Hash of the commit
- %aN: Author name
- %aI: Author date (strict ISO 8601)
- %s: Subject

Enter command in the project 1 git repository folder to generate log of timestamp

```shell
awk -F',' '{ print $1 "," $2 "," $4 }' commits.csv > db.csv
awk -F',' '{ cmd = "date -d \"" $3 "\" +%s"; cmd | getline unix_time; close(cmd); print $1 "," $2 "," $3 "," unix_time }' commits.csv > timestamp.csv
```

#### 1.2 Database system installation

As you want to ensure your understanding and guesses are correct you need to verify a few things online.
Luckily your network seems back to normal, so you can use a proper search engine and ensure the
correctness of what you found.

- What are the most common database systems?
- Briefly list the pros and cons of the three most common ones.

There are several common database systems used in industry.

PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, MongoDB, Redis, Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, Apache Cassandra, etc.

Ignoring enterprise DB systems like Oracle, Microsoft SQL Server, or AWS servers, and
specialized database system like Redis used for quick access or Apache Cassandra for data engineering,  
PostgreSQL, MySQL, and MongoDB are most commonly used in general software development.
SQLite is used widely too, but it is mostly for learning level or small scale projects,

`MySQL` is RDBMS (Relational Database Management System) commonly used for Web applications.

Pros of MySQL

- Fast performance in reading heavy workload
- Setup is relatively easy with various versions including both open source and enterprise
- High popularity, several extensions and libraries, more data to search and debug

Cons of MySQL

- Not enough advanced functions like no full text search
- Relatively poor flexibility to build complicated relational DB
- ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) support is not good

`PostgreSQL` is also RDBMS but used for more complex queries and extensible system.

Pros of PostgreSQL

- Supports custom data types, functions, and operators, so great extensibility
- Supports advanced SQL features (like full-text search, CTEs, JSONB).
- ACID-compliant, ensuring data integrity.
- Open-source with a strong community.

Cons of PostgreSQL

- Requires setup for optimal performance for complicated datasets.
- Relatively more complex to set up and manage database systems compared to other DB systems.
- If not optimized, it is slower than some NoSQL databases for heavy operations.

`MongoDB` is NoSQL (Non-RDB), or Document Database since it does not save data in table form.

Pros of MongoDB

- Manage unstructured data efficiently
- Horizontal scaling, or sharding, let easy access in server system
- Supports JSON similar documents
- Efficient for Agile development with quickly changing database schema

Cons of MongoDB

- No ACID consideration in default, nowadays better but still poor compared to RDBMS
- Compared to SQL, Query is relatively not efficient
- Inefficient data structure require more memory and storage than RDB

##### After completing your reading you decide to install SQLite on your Linux system.

The next step is now to import your git database into two tables.

- Create an empty SQLite database.
- Use the SQLite shell to prepare two empty tables for each of your .csv file.
- Import each .csv file in its corresponding SQLite table.

In macOS, install SQLite by `brew`. Use other command for Linux.

```shell
brew intall sqlite3 # macOS
sudo apt update && sudo apt install sqlite3 # Linux or WSL
```

Then, create new database

```shell
sqlite3 l4.db
```

Based on the csv files generated in previous exercise, create two database tables.

```sqlite
CREATE TABLE db
(
    hash TEXT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    comment TEXT NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE timestamp
(
    hash TEXT NOT NULL,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    date TEXT,
    stamp INT
);

.QUIT
```

Now, import `db.csv` and `timestamp.csv` for each SQLite table.

#### 1.3 Database queries

At this stage you want to run basic queries to verify that the database has been imported correctly.
Therefore, you spend the rest of the evening playing around the database and running queries.

- Who are the top five contributors to the Linux kernel since the beginning?
- Who are the top five contributors to the Linux kernel for each year over the past five years?
- What is the most common “commit subject”?
- On which day is the number of commits the highest?
- Determine the average time between two commits for the five main contributors.

First, generate SQLite database and import generated csv files

```shell
sqlite3 lab4.db
```

Create database schema

```sqlite
CREATE TABLE db (
    hash TEXT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    comment TEXT NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE timestamp (
    hash TEXT NOT NULL PRIMARY KEY,
    name TEXT NOT NULL,
    date TEXT,
    stamp INT
);

.separator "|"
.import db.psv db
.import timestamp.psv timestamp
```

Now ready to run SQL Queries.

Who are the top five contributors to the Linux kernel since the beginning?

```sqlite
SELECT name, count(*)
FROM timestamp
GROUP BY name
ORDER BY count(*) DESC
LIMIT 5;
```

Returns

```text
Linus Torvalds|30702
David S. Miller|13180
Takashi Iwai|7726
Mark Brown|7670
Arnd Bergmann|7520
```

Who are the top five contributors to the Linux kernel for each year over the past five years?

```sqlite
SELECT name, COUNT(name) AS count
FROM timestamp
WHERE strftime('%Y', datetime(stamp, 'unixepoch')) = '2020'
GROUP BY name
ORDER BY count DESC
LIMIT 5;
```

Since data is not available after 2020, query ran from 2016 to 2020

Year 2020

```text
Linus Torvalds|1886
David S. Miller|924
Christoph Hellwig|806
Mauro Carvalho Chehab|770
Chris Wilson|644
```

Year 2019

```text
Linus Torvalds|2386
David S. Miller|1206
Chris Wilson|1173
YueHaibing|930
Christoph Hellwig|911
```

Year 2018

```text
Linus Torvalds|2168
David S. Miller|1405
Arnd Bergmann|922
Christoph Hellwig|818
Colin Ian King|798
```

Year 2017

```text
Linus Torvalds|2303
David S. Miller|1420
Arnd Bergmann|1123
Chris Wilson|1028
Arvind Yadav|827
```

Year 2016

```text
Linus Torvalds|2273
Arnd Bergmann|1185
David S. Miller|1150
Chris Wilson|992
Mauro Carvalho Chehab|975
```

What is the most common “commit subject”?

```sqlite
SELECT comment, COUNT(name) AS count
FROM db
GROUP BY comment
ORDER BY count DESC LIMIT 1;
```

Most coommon commit subject was

```text
Merge git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/davem/net|670
```

On which day is the number of commits the highest?

```sqlite
SELECT  date(date) AS day, COUNT(name) AS count
FROM timestamp
GROUP BY day
ORDER BY count DESC
LIMIT 3;
```

The day with highest commits is 2008 January 30th with 1031 commits

```text
2008-01-30|1031
2006-12-07|683
2007-05-08|649
```

Determine the average time between two commits for the five main contributors.

This query structure is quite challenging with more complex logic.
Make `time_diffs` value, `LAG(stamp)` function retrieve data from
previous commit. For compromised calculation due to no previous data,
prevent collision by `WHERE time_diff IS NOT NULL`.

```sqlite
WITH time_diffs AS (
    SELECT
        name,
        (stamp - LAG(stamp) OVER (PARTITION BY name ORDER BY stamp)) AS time_diff
    FROM timestamp
)
SELECT name,
       AVG(time_diff) AS avg_time_between_commits
FROM time_diffs
WHERE time_diff IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY name
ORDER BY COUNT(name) DESC
LIMIT 5;
```

This returns following, in seconds unit.

```text
Linus Torvalds|15880.6766554835     #  4.4 Hours
David S. Miller|36956.1432582138    # 10.3 Hours
Takashi Iwai|63301.1109385113       # 17.5 Hours
Mark Brown|59933.2400573738         # 16.7 Hours
Arnd Bergmann|63807.0030589174      # 17.6 Hours
```

### Exercise 2 Debugging

You are pretty happy and enjoying the database tasks when your mum pops in your room. She looks
pretty upset that you are still not asleep as she thinks you were playing video games…
When you explain her to that you have terrible bugs in your shell and needed a bit of change, she asked
you whether you had used GDB. As you replied “Can I eat it?” she realises you probably do not know
much about it. She kindly tells you to have a quick try at it on your current mumsh version to preview it.
This should become very handy if you ever have to work on a large scale project.

1. How to enable built-in debugging in `gcc`?
2. What is the meaning of GDB?
3. Compile the master branch of you mumsh with debugging enabled.

#### 2.0.1 How to enable built-in debugging in `gcc`?

```shell
gcc -g -o main main.c util.c
gdb ./main
```

#### 2.0.2 What is the meaning of GDB?

GDB stands for GNU Debugger.

#### 2.0.3 Compile the master branch of you mumsh with debugging enabled.

```shell
clang-18 -std=gnu17 -O2 -Wall -Wextra -Werror -pedantic -Wno-unused-result -Wconversion -Wvla main.c utils.c mumsh.c init.c -o mumsh
gdb ./mumsh
```

#### 2.1 Basic GDB usage

1. Find the homepage of the GDB project.
2. What languages are supported by

#### 2.1.1 Find the homepage of the GDB project.

[GDB: The GNU Project Debugger](https://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/)

#### 2.1.2 What languages are supported by GDB?

- Ada
- Assembly
- C
- C++
- D
- Fortran
- Go
- Objective-C
- OpenCL
- Modula-2
- Pascal
- Rust

These programming languages are supported by GDB.
