# Lab 02

ECE4820 FA2024 Introduction to Operating Systems

518370990004 Jae Heung Park

---

### Exercise 1 Project 1: presentations (part 1)

Our Topic was Background Processing

My teammate is Jin Lock Choi

### Exercise 2 Systems setup

#### 2.1 Linux kernel compilation

• What is a kernel?

Kernel is key concept in Operating System located
between hardware and software.
It manages computer resources including CPU,
VGA, Memory, and Input/Output devices.

• What basic tools are necessary to compile the Linux kernel?

Linux kernel is compiled by GCC, GNU Compiler Collection
to build. Git and GNU make are also necessary.

• List all the commands necessary to compile the kernel.

```shell
wget -v https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/tj/sched_ext.git/snapshot/sched_ext-for-6.11.tar.gz
tar -zxvf sched_ext-for-6.11.tar.gz
cd sched_ext-for-6.11

cp /boot/config-$(uname -r) .config
scripts/config --disable SYSTEM_TRUSTED_KEYS
scripts/config --disable SYSTEM_REVOCATION_KEYS
make CC=clang menuconfig

nano .config # OR simply change in editor

make CC=clang -j$(nproc)

sudo make modules_install
sudo make install

sudo reboot
```

• Why is it recommended to start with the Linux config file from your distribution?

Linux .config file is very long with about over 10,000 lines.
Copying configuration file will be wiser.

• Compile the kernel. How long did it take?

After several failure and VMWare Fusion setup change, it took about 30 minutes to compile the downloaded kernel.
This time consumption can be changed by several factors.

• Why is code quality so critical at the kernel level?

In OS kernel, tiny code bug or memory leak may cause
catastrophic result in the entire operating system.

#### 2.2 Software Development

• Briefly explain what is CI/CD.

CI/CD, Continuous Integration / Continuous Delivery.
CI stands for continuous integration of several programmers contributing to the shared repo.
CD stands for continuous delivery of programming software automizing the entire process of
project build, test, and deployment.
Cooperation with multiple software engineers in enterprise level
should consider development process of CI/CD to operate efficiently.

• Why is having a consistent coding style important in industry?

Consistent coding style is important in industry for several reasons including
Unified convention to quickly read and review other's code,
relatively convenient maintenance of CI/CD,
contributing to reduce code analysis time and debugging.

• What is the benefit of sanitizers?

Sanitizers could detect unexpected processes or bugs.
Automized code quality and automatic debugging
increases platform compatibility and bug logs.
It is relatively safer in memory leaks too.

### Exercise 3 Remote work

As system administrators seldom have a physical access to their servers they remotely connect using a
tool called Secure SHell (SSH). It allows them to log into a remote server and launch a regular shell,
while keeping all the network traffic encrypted.

• Setup an SSH server on Linux VM. From Linux (using ssh) or Windows (using Putty) log into it.
Note: the network need to be properly setup on the VM (bridge mode recommended).

Install SSH server and run it

```shell
sudo apt update
sudo apt install openssh-server
sudo systemctl start ssh
sudo systemctl enable ssh
```

Log in into your linux virtual machine

• What is the default SSH port? Change this port for port 2222. Log into your Linux VM using this
new SSH server setup.

```shell
sudo nano /etc/ssh/sshd_config
```

Change Port number

```text
#Port 22
Port 2222
```

```shell
sudo systemctl restart ssh
ssh -p 2222 <username>@<VM-IP-Address>
```

• List and explain the role of each the file in the $HOME/.ssh directory. In $HOME/.ssh/config, create
an entry for the Linux VM.

`$HOME/.ssh/authorized_keys` contains external public keys that can log in into server.

`$HOME/.ssh/id_rsa` contains private RSA key saved locally inside without external connection.

`$HOME/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` contains public RSA key shared with external servers.

`$HOME/.ssh/known_hosts` contains previously connected server host keys.

`$HOME/.ssh/config` contains configuration for local SSH.

• Briefly explain how key-only authentication works in SSH. Generate an ed25519 key-pair on the host
system and use it to log into the VM without a password.

### Exercise 4 Basic git

Git is a very power version control system initially introduced to help in the development of the Linux
kernel around 2005. It has since then become a widely used tool omnipresent in industry. It is therefore
of a vital importance to be proficient at it in order to better prepare for your future career and create
more internship opportunities.

• Setup git on your computer, we will use it for the rest of the semester.

```shell
sudo apt install git
```

• Search the use of the following git commands:

– `help` is display help information for git like `man` in linux

– `init` initializes git repository in current folder, generating .git directory in current path.

– `checkout` can switch branch or restore files.
`git checkout branch_name` will change branch, and
`git checkout -- file.cpp` will change file
into last committed state.

– `branch` can list, generate, or remove branches.
Only `git branch` command lists all branches, `git branch new_branch_name`
will make new name, and `git branch -d branch_name` will remove branch.

– `push` will transfer local commit into remote repository.

– `pull` will transfer remote repository data change into local branch.

– `merge` will combine one branch into another branch. `git merge branch_name`
will apply both changes of `branch_name` branch and currently working branch.

– `add` means next commit will include added file. `git add .` will add all.

– `diff` will list commits, branches, work trees.

– `tag` will create reference for commit.
For instance, version tag like `git tag v2.0` can be used.

– `log` shows all commit record for current branch.

– `fetch` will download files from remote repo.
It is often used if remote repo has update.

– `commit` will save changed status in a tree.

– `clone` will download remote repo and create local repo by copying remote repo.

– `reset` will get back all repo changes into certain commit.

• Setup your git repository on Gitea.

Follow and reproduce on your personal repository the demo from the TAs showing a common git workflow.

### Exercise 5 Project 1: presentations (part 2)
