# Stack Local Variable Contamination 

### User Level Thread is not a Thread 

In Old WINAPI System Programming book, user level thread is explained, 
but this is not considered as thread anymore. 
In past, some UNIX based OS had no thread concept and used process as thread, so 
they made internal concept of thread, but it is actually not a thread 
that could do parallel machine code execution. It works serially, not parallely. 
User thread makes one more call stack on kernel thread. 
Nowadays, Unity Game Engine works in single thread, so it uses Coroutine. 
In OS perspective, making so called user thread inside one kernel level thread is 
just one kernel thread. WinAPI Fiber do this, but this is unnecessary. 
Thus, ignore concept of user level thread, and suppose all threads affected by 
OS scheduler are kernel level threads. 
So called User Level thread is not useful for parallel threads execution and multithreading. 


Function infinite recursion risk is stack overflow, 
reaching 1 MB stack maximum size reach. 

```cpp
void func(int a){func(a);}
int main(){func(0);}
```

This will be warned by compiler, that stack overflow is inevitable. 

```cpp
void func(int a){ if(a > 9999) break; func(a);}
int main(){func(0);}
```
However, unlikely condition like this will NOT make stack overflow meaning. Be cautious. 

So when does stack overflow happens? 
In Debug mode, since more space stack is assigned, stack overflow might happen quicker. 
In sample code, debug mode got about 4700 calls until stack overflow while release mode got 85000. 

## stack local variable contamination 

If stack variable gets read access error, 
or stack variable access wrong data by distorted address, then 
it represents that stack access variable is wrong, meaning one of 

- `ebp` for X86  
- `rsp` for X86-64 

is contaminated in 100% Probability of cause.  
Since register variable `ebp` or `esp` are registers, it seems that it is not likely to be contaminated. 

However, `ebp` is more likely to be contaminated easier than `esp`. Let's see why. 

This is typical `esp` update procedure. 

``` 
mov         ebp, esp 
sub         esp, 54h 
// function  
mov         esp, ebp 
```

Mostly `esp` values are changed by registers or constants calculation only, so it is safe from contamination. 
However, `ebp` is different. It saves caller function stack base pointer, which is `ebp` of pointer. 

```
push        ebp  
mov         ebp,esp 
// function 
mov         esp,ebp  
pop         ebp 
``` 

`push ebp` saves caller stack frame base pointer into stack memory. 
`pop ebp` retrieves caller stack frame base pointer from that stack memory. 
The problem is, what if that stack memory address saving caller base pointer, is accessed and changed? 
callee function works fine, but when instruction register jump back to continue execution of 
caller function, its local variable that are supposed to be accessible by relative distance 
between ebp, like [ebp-8] as `int a` or similar, would get completely different memory. 

```
| *arr    | Local variable 
| cookie  | In MSVC for pointer calculation, this place exists for safety. `__security_cookie` Canary 
| old ebp | Caller Function Stack Frame Base Pointer 
| ret eip | Return Instruction Pointer pointing caller function 
| int  b  | Input Parameters 
| int  a  | Input Parameters 
| main    | Main Function Stack Frame 
```

When access memory by pointer by using *arr, like *(arr + idx) = 1234 where idx is -4, 
which is location where old `ebp` is stored.  
stack memory address that might contain old `ebp` or return `eip`, might  
potentially be contaminated. 

When callee function is returned, and ebp register value is updated into old ebp value, 
then caller function accessing local variables by relative distance with `ebp` will not 
operate properly. If error happens, it is easy to detect. However, worst scenario is that 
it somehow works, and malfunctions while running and no one detect it. This might make 
tremendous amount of error, so some user data is distorted, meaning online game server 
rollback, aka tremendous amount of company profit loss.

In Debug Mode, `ebp` and `eip` were accessible by this function method. 

``` 
    31: void func() {
00893430  push        ebp  
00893431  mov         ebp,esp  
00893433  sub         esp,54h  
00893436  mov         eax,dword ptr [__security_cookie (0897040h)]  
0089343B  xor         eax,ebp  
0089343D  mov         dword ptr [ebp-4],eax  
00893440  push        ebx  
00893441  push        esi  
00893442  push        edi  
00893443  mov         ecx,offset _12BD23D1_tmain@cpp (089907Bh)  
00893448  call        @__CheckForDebuggerJustMyCode@4 (0891276h)  
0089344D  nop  
    32: 	int arr[3];
    33: 	int* ptr = nullptr; 
0089344E  mov         dword ptr [ptr],0  
    34: 	*(arr) = 1; 
00893455  mov         eax,4  
0089345A  imul        ecx,eax,0  
0089345D  mov         dword ptr arr[ecx],1  
    35: 	ptr = (arr + 4); // Forced ebp access 
00893465  lea         eax,[ebp]  
00893468  mov         dword ptr [ptr],eax  
    36: 	// ptr = (arr + 5); // Forced eip access 
    37: 	*ptr = 0; 
0089346B  mov         eax,dword ptr [ptr]  
0089346E  mov         dword ptr [eax],0  
    38: 
    39: 	// printf("%p", ptr);
    40: }
00893474  pop         edi  
00893475  pop         esi  
00893476  pop         ebx  
00893477  mov         ecx,dword ptr [ebp-4]  
0089347A  xor         ecx,ebp  
0089347C  call        @__security_check_cookie@4 (0891113h)  
00893481  mov         esp,ebp  
00893483  pop         ebp  
00893484  ret  
```

When pointer calculation is used in cpp code, 
compiler push `__security_cookie` into stack memory to check safety. 
It exists to prevent pointer access to old `ebp` or return `eip` variables
that would result in unexpected behavoir.  

So, for instance, if access to the space before first local variable happens, 
like arr[idx] which is *(arr + 4); 

In Debug Mode code sample, 

```cpp
static void func() 
{
    volatile int arr[4] = { 0, };
    volatile int *ptr; 
    *arr = 10; 

    ptr = arr; // Stack Address 
    ptr += 3; // skip arr memory space and reach arr[0] 
    *ptr = 0xABCDABCD;
    ptr += 1; // Debug buffer space 0XFFFFFFFF 
    *ptr = 0xEEEEEEEE; 
    ptr += 1; // __security_check_cookie Canary 
    *ptr = 0xDDDDDDDD;
    ptr += 1; // ebp 
    *ptr = 0xCCCCCCCC;
    ptr += 1; // eip 
    *ptr = 0xBBBBBBBB;
}
```

`Ctrl` + `Alt` + `M` -> Then Press 1 2 3 OR 4, then memory table is visible showing 
something similar to below. 

```
0x0055F7AC  fe ba dc fe  
0x0055F7B0  00 00 00 00  
0x0055F7B4  00 00 00 00  
0x0055F7B8  00 00 00 00  
0x0055F7BC  cc cc cc cc  // Debug Padding 
0x0055F7C0  7a f8 a0 80  // Canary, security cookie 
0x0055F7C4  98 f8 55 00  // Caller function ebp 
0x0055F7C8  94 19 5b 00  // Caller function eip 
```

After function `func` executes completely, then address will be following. 

```
0x0055F7AC  fe ba dc fe  
0x0055F7B0  00 00 00 00  
0x0055F7B4  00 00 00 00  
0x0055F7B8  cd ab cd ab  
0x0055F7BC  ba dc ba dc  
0x0055F7C0  cd ab cd ab  
0x0055F7C4  ba dc ba dc  
0x0055F7C8  cd ab cd ab  
```

Distorting each part would make unexpected behavior. 
Debug padding is okay to contaminate. 

Memory contamination saving caller register values for Debug and Release Mode 
In debug mode, padding exists. However, release mode do not have padding. 
Thus, old `ebp` or `eip` register backup saved in memory might not be 
contaminated in debug mode while contaminated in release mode. 

Canary contamination 

```
 mov         eax,dword ptr [__security_cookie (022A000h)]  
 xor         eax,ebp  
 mov         dword ptr [ebp-4],eax  
 mov         ecx,offset _84A7C6DE_BasePtrContaminate@cpp (022C00Dh) 
```

When function with pointer memory acess is called, 
This kind of `ebp` memory access checker
save location of `__security_cookie`, where is `[ebp-4]`.
Before saved, it would be `xor`ed with `eax`.  

```
mov         ecx,ebp  
... assembly codes ... 
 mov         ecx,dword ptr [ebp-4]  
 xor         ecx,ebp  
 call        @__security_check_cookie@4 (022114Fh)  
```
Function with pointer memory access finishes, 
variable stored in `[ebp-4]`, that is result of `xor` of 
`__security_cookie` Canary and current function caller function `ebp`. 

Function call of `__security_check_cookie` will jump here. 

```
cmp         ecx,dword ptr [__security_cookie (022A000h)]  
jne         failure (0221CA9h)  
ret  
jmp         ___report_gsfailure (022102Dh) 
```

Consequence of XOR function will result here. 
XOR calculated value of original `ebp` stored will check whether 
memory value in `[ebp-4]` is accessed and changed or not. If changed, it will throw error. 

However, if `[ebp-4]` is not touched while `[ebp]` itself memory area is contaminated, 
compiler will NOT detect error. This will distort all data inside memory. 


The function above to deliberately contaminate canary, `ebp` and `eip` works in 
debug mode. However, it does NOT work in release mode. 


Might turn off this warning 
`/wd4789`: "buffer overrun detected at compile time"

