# Time Measurement 

Time Measurement 


Pros and cons of Recursion status check 

```cpp
void Recurse(int row, int col, int val){
    if (0 < col) Recurse(row, col - 1, val); 
    if (0 < row) Recurse(row - 1, col, val); 
    if (col < col_size - 1) Recurse(row, col + 1, val);
    if (row < row_size - 1) Recurse(row + 1, col, val); 
}
// VS 
void Recurse(int row, int col, int val){
    if (0 < col || 0 < row) return; 
    if(col < col_size - 1 || row < row_size - 1) return;  
    Recurse(row, col - 1, val); 
    Recurse(row - 1, col, val); 
    Recurse(row, col + 1, val);
    Recurse(row + 1, col, val); 
}
```
Formal one decreases unnecessary function calls, but sometimes 
latter one is used due to more clear code readability. 

Then Which one is better in algorithm, to use 
either recursion, or `std::stack` based DFS or `std::queue` based BFS? 

Several students expect that resource consumed for function call might be larger 
so that Recursion will be less efficient. 

## Time Measurement 

`GetTickCount()` is Windows API 
`timeGetTime()` Requires other library 

Other time measurement functions, for instance `chrono` in C++. 

`GetTickCount()` function 1000 means 1 second, but update is not per 1ms but about 10 ~ 16 ms. 
Expressable unit does not always represent that update is per unit. 
It might be 10 or 15 or whatever, not 1 per tick. 

`clock()` function is supported by C language. MSDN `clock()` this one is process clock time. 

CLOCK_PER_SECOND unit which is default 1000, requires `#include <time.h>`. 

Even C++ standard time functions are internally OS independent, so they use WinAPI internally in WinOS 

QueryPeformanceCounter(&Start); 

Profiling the speed of the CPU operation, then `milisecond` unit is too late to measure. 
If it is DB Query handle etc ... then milisecond unit might be enough, 
but CPU level requires `microsecond` or even `nanosecond` is sometimes not enough to measure. 

Our OS is in multi tasking so check by Ctrl Shift ESC then there are about 
200 processes, 2000 threads, and 70000 HANDLEs, which are a lot, and have variation of CPU usage. 

If function takes about 500ms, then performance measurement would be quite meaningful in `ms` unit. 
However, some CPU functions take barely less than 10 ms, even lower than 1ms. This case, 
the external intervention would be significantly meaningful, and 
measuring my function logic completely will be unlikely! 

CPU running my process only is impossible. Even though very accurate time in nanoseconds unit is 
acquired, it is just a value returned from somewhere in OS kernel, even time value acquiring moment 
might happen process block interrupt or thread context switching. 

So, it is not getting exactly accurate time, but close to get closest time by several tries. 

### Method 1, measurement of millions of times   

1 microsecond 2 microseconds 5 microseconds ... about millions of times of check will return estimated time, 
and receive the average value. 

### Method 2, measuremnt by multiple executions 

If micorsecond, or even nanosecond unit is not enough to accurately measure the time 
like returning 0 or 1 always, for each measurement, then best option would be 
repeating that part enough to measure meaningful time. 


### Union 

Datatype union shares data inside. 

```cpp
union DATA {
	char  		ch; 
	short int  	sin; 
	int 		in; 
}; 
```

Internal structure will be like this 

```
|7|8|1|2|6|3|6|7|
              \c/
			\sin/
        \   in  /
```

When extension is C meaning file is `.c` then `typedef` declaration is required, 
but unnecessary for `.cpp` file. 
For some data types like IP address, `union` datatype is often used similar to below. 

```cpp 
struct _DATA { // ip addr 192.168.0.1 
	char a; // 192 
	char b; // 168  
	char c; 
	char d; 
}DATA;

union udata 
{
	DATA d; 
	unsigned long u; 
}
```

So that it is both accessible in entire data like `udata.u` and `udata.d.a` conveniently. 

Also, even though not used often there is a concept called bit field. 

```cpp
struct bitfield {
	unsigned int bit_a : 3; 
	unsigned int bit_b : 3; 
	unsigned int bit_C : 3; 
}
```

Not used nowadays, just know the existence. 

## Dynamic Memory Allocation 

Functions like `malloc` `calloc` `realloc`. 
Internally `realloc` does not often reuse that space, but instead just 
allocate new space and `memcpy` data internally. 
Unless there are specific reasons to use `calloc`, do not always try to 
reset buffer by `calloc` but make a code that do not need to reset entire buffer, 
unless there is specific reason to use it. 

`memcpy` can be used, but not a huge difference compared to `for` loop based copy. 
`memcpy` `memmove` can be used but should be used carefully and not recommmended often.  

Suppose code like this 

```cpp
int main () 
{
	int *p = (int*) malloc (40); 
	p++; 
	free(p); 
}
``` 

This is not trying to free allocated data so free will not work causing heap error. 

### Dangling Pointer 

```cpp
int main () 
{
	int *p = (int*) malloc (40); 
	free(p); 
	*p = 0;
}
```

This code is likely to cause Segmentation Fault if compiler setup about segment is activated. 
Typical Dangling Pointer issue, however if segmentation check is not activated, then this code will work! 
Which is dangerous and not recommended. 

`malloc` and other dynamic memory allocation is access to heap in virtual memory. 
Internally `malloc` in Windows OS would work like this. 

```------------
new C++ 
---------
malloc C++ 
----------
heap alloc WINAPI 
---------- 
virtual alloc WINAPI 
--------------
```

In CPU perspective, heap is also just memory. 
All Memories operate in Page Unit. 
In OS perspective the minimum memory allocation unit is 4KB, $2^{12}$ ALWAYS. 
Thus, if your process main thread allocate 1 char then 
virtual memory will allocate 4KB in some part of virtual memory, even though 
you will use only 1 byte among those 4096 bytes. 

In OS perspective, unless you do not have segmentation fault check, 
access area outside `.text` and `.rodata` will not result in direct error and termination. 
It would NOT cause compile error. 

Access itself, Error by Write itself means that Virtual Memory is NOT allocated. 
Even though you do `malloc (40)`, using only 40 bytes, System will allocate 4KB. 

If 4KB is full, then it will additionally allocate one more page and return pointer. 
Also, the access to that 4KB area in virtual memory, if it is still allocated, 
will let access by pointer possible, unless segmentation fault check is activated. 

Debug Build allocation or free then `0xdddddddd` reset. 
Access to virtual memory address that are NOT committed are expressed with `??` for all bytes. 
Access there will cause error. 

Also freeing all data, so that heap memory space is decommitted, became `??` for all bytes, 
then access to that previously heap memory would cause Error. 

When OS was 16 bit based there was no concept like virtual memory, only physical memory existed. 
Allocation was just a promise. 

Take a look at about heap address memory, `0xfdfdfdfd` is similar to `__security_cookie` in debug 
mode stack frame using pointer, so that changing that area `0xfdfdfdfd` would be checked, 
and will pop up error if `free` is called, causing Debug Error. 
This is not error caused by OS or CPU, but by C/C++ programming language and SW! 
Not error by access, but error by free memory. 

`0xcdcdcdcd` 
`0xdddddddd`
`0xfdfdfdfd`

All these memories are debug assistance hits. 

### Virtual Memory 

All unused memory on RAM would get removed while saved on HDD. 
However, pretend that virtual memory suppose they are in Memory. 

Actual RAM exists about 16GB while processes use about 32GB 64GB virtual memory for each 
removing unused data from RAM, and if those data unused are now accessed and not in RAM it is Page Fault. 

OS CPU perspective, process Memory acquisition from SSD HDD to RAM unit is 4KB 

Committed actually, but not mapped on the physical memory. 
Process got memory allocated but still not in virtual memory but considered as commit size. 

low fragment heap 

### Check Contol to see memory leak 

작업 관리자 

작업 관리자 > 프로세스 > 메모리 어걸 보던가 
더 정확하게는 작업 관리자 > 세부 정보 > 프로세스 지정하고 
작업집합메모리 메모리활성개인 메모리개인 
탭 우클릭 > 열 선택 > 추가항목 

메모리 활성개인작업집합 
메모리 개인작업집합 
커밋 크기 
활성 

If Commit Memory continue to increase memory leak is suspected 
