# Debugging Process of Base Pointer or Instruction Pointer Contamination 

What `ret` does includes `pop eip`, which includes decrementing `esp` register too.  
Or in other words, it pops what `esp` is pointing and save it into `eip`. 

When stack variable result in unexpected variable 

This is typical end of the disassembly of function. 

```
00FE1144  add         esp,8  
00FE1147  mov         ecx,dword ptr [ebp-4]  
00FE114A  xor         ecx,ebp  
00FE114C  call        __security_check_cookie (0FE116Ch)  
00FE1151  mov         esp,ebp  
00FE1153  pop         ebp  
00FE1154  ret  
```

In this disassembly code, `ret` will pop current memory right below `ebp`. 

This is memory hierarchy before the callee function is terminated. 

```
|------------|
|   Callee   |
|   Stack    |
|   Frame    |
|------------| 
|   Canary   |
|------------|
| ebp backup | <- Potentially Might be accessed and changed 
|------------| 
| eip backup | <- Potentially Might be accessed and changed 
|------------| 
| Parameters |
|------------|
|   Caller   |
|   Stack    |
|   Frame    | 
|------------|
```

When pop `ebp` is called, the previous base pointer value is restored from the stack into `ebp`. 
This does not delete memory, but simply moves the esp up by 4 bytes (in 32-bit). 

When `ret` is called, the return address (original `eip`) is popped from the top of the stack 
into the instruction pointer `eip`. Again, this modifies `esp`, not memory content directly.

## Debugging Process of Base Pointer Contamination 

Goal : Detect when memory of caller function base pointer backup is changed. 

First, when `ebp` is changed in callee function, then callee function itself 
would work mostly correct with appropriate access to stack members like `ebp - 4` similar calculations. 
However, when `pop ebp` replace current `ebp` to old `ebp` of previous caller stack frame, but 
it is contaminated, then caller function access in stack frame variables will be completely wrong, 
causing either error, or for worse, undefined behavior.  

Suppose code like this. 

```cpp
__declspec(noinline)
static void parent() {
    int a = 0; 
    printf("%d", a); 
    func1(); 
    fpfunc(); 
    func2();
    func3(); 
    a++; // Error thrown, reading access violated. 
}
```

Stack variable seems to be disrupted. 

First, check current `ebp` register value. If it is strange, it is clear. 
Then, `ebp` contamination should be checked by `__debugbreak();` function. 

Contamination of `ebp` can be detectable through local variable. For instance, 
if one single local variable exist, then meaningless assignment of 
static variable from local variable would detect any `ebp` contamination easily. 

```cpp
static void parent() {
    volatile static int g_whatever; 
    int a = 0; 
    printf("%d", a); 
    a = 1; 
    func1(); 
    g_whatever = a; 
    func3();
    g_whatever = a;
    fpfunc(); 
    // Same checking process ... 
}
```

However, when there does not exist any local variable, only likely option is to use 
function called as `_AddressOfReturnAddress()` which will return pointer value of 
`eip` address that is right below the `ebp`. 

```cpp
#include <intrin.h>

__declspec(noinline)
static void parent() {
    volatile static uintptr_t* g_ebptr;
    volatile static uintptr_t g_ebpvalue;
    g_ebptr = reinterpret_cast<uintptr_t*> // eip - 4
        ((uintptr_t) _AddressOfReturnAddress() - sizeof(void*));
    g_ebpvalue = *g_ebptr; 
    func1(); 
    g_ebptr = reinterpret_cast<uintptr_t*> // eip - 4
		((uintptr_t)_AddressOfReturnAddress() - sizeof(void*));
	if (g_ebpvalue != *g_ebptr) __debugbreak(); // check if ebp is contaminated
    func3();
    // Same checking process ... 
}
```

This is very messy and require header, so not that much recommended approach.

### Prove `bp` backup value is contaminated. 

First, check `esp`. 
From `esp`, look whether upper variable is 0 or not. 

During debugging, Registers are visible. However, how to check 
current `ebp` value by checking ? 

### 64 Bit 

The 32 Bit disassembly function call and finish are composed by strict following pattern 

```
push ebp 
add esp 12h // Whatever 
...
mov esp ebp 
pop ebp
ret
```

However, Release mode of 64 Bit stack frame acquisition might NOT use `rbp`, only based on 
pure calculation of `rsp`, while `rbp` is used for some kind of other saving register, 
especially in release mode. In debug mode, `rbp` works like `ebp` though.  

```
sub         rsp,48h  
add         rsp,48h  
```

Thus, in 64 Bit OS Release Mode debugging, base pointer contamination 
disrupting stack frame variable access by method like `[ebp - 8]` is not likely. 

## Debugging Process of Instruction Pointer Contamination 

Goal : Detect when memory of caller function instruction register backup is changed. 

Every disassembly debugging is possible based on register that contains instruction pointer value. 
However, when this instruction pointer is contaminated, even currently operating function 
is not working. Then, how to detect problem? 

Probability of Register Instruction Pointer `rip` or `eip` will change in following circumstances. 

- Move to next 
- Jump `jmp` `jeq` `jne` etc ... 
- Function `call` change `ip` to target assembly code 
- Function `ret` pop `ip` to return from stack 

Given that C++ code is compiled and linked without error, it means that 
code itself works for basic logic including execution of next command or jump. 
Potential likelihood of `eip` contanimation is two : either `call` or `ret`. 

When function pointer parameter is not transferred properly into `call`, then 
function call might point invalid zone, making unexpected behavior. 

If the return address (saved instruction pointer) on the stack is overwritten, 
the `ret` instruction will jump to an unintended location. 
This is often seen in stack corruption or exploitation scenarios and 
can result in crashes or arbitrary code execution.

So first, distinguish whether it is function call pointer problem or IP register backup 
contamination problem. 

For 32 Bit Architecture, when Instruction pointer is completely broken, 
both function call pointer interruption and `eip` disruption can be checked by 
checking `ebp` register, which is currently saving the previous caller function
`ebp`. Also, below previous `ebp` there would be previous `eip` too. 
So, when Only `eip` is corrupted, and `ebp` is still same, make following approach. 

```
|------------|
| ebp callee | <-This might be safe, saving (ebp caller) address 
|------------| 
| eip backup | <-Suppose this is corrupted 
|------------| 
| Parameters |
|------------|
|   Caller   |
|   Stack    |
|   Frame    | 
|------------|
| ebp caller | <-This place is accessible 
|------------| 
| eip backup | <-This place is right below, containing .text area address 
|------------| 
```

Now, based on the address saved in `eip` backup of caller function, 
search disassembly code address to find out function. 
Then, finally can reach caller function of the function that corrupted `eip`. 

Given `ebp` is still not contaminated so it exist as callee function `ebp`, 
tracking root would be following. 

1. Search `ebp` register saving address in Memory 
2. Suppose that address is caller function `ebp` stored, and look at one space down. 
3. Suppose it as caller function `eip`, and search them in code area to see caller function code.  

Now, at least parent function of the function that contaminated `eip` is detectable. 

In 64 Bit Architecture, `rip` contamination would work quite similar. 
However, 64 Bit Architecture has way more security features, and also 
stack frame structure is not as intuitively clear as 32 Bit. 


### Create Dump File `.DMP`. 

```shell 
.dump [options] FileName
.dump /?
```

Or, Ctrl Shift ESC -> Make Snapshot 

작업 관리자 / 세부 정보 / 프로세스 목록 / exe 우클릭 / 덤프 파일 만들기 

Path 

DMP File Path location 

```
C:\Users\user\AppData\Local\Temp\ProcessName.DMP
```

관리 전용 디버그 
혼합 디버그 
네이티브 전용 디버그 <- Select This 
