# Context Switching, Stack Frames, and Struct Alignment

Low-Level Memory and CPU Behavior in C/C++ on x64 Systems

### Context Switching 

CPU save current CPU physical thread status, register status backuped by kernel 
and kernel load another thread backup to load it into physical thread. 

Context Switching itself does not reset cache in default. However, changing 
entire physical thread to something else will make cache miss, so load for 
higher level Cache, or RAM would be required. 

So, cache misses and memory reloads are **side effects** of context switching,   
rather than part of the switching process itself. 
Some CPUs may partially flush or partition L1 cache during a context switch 
(e.g., on SMT or security-focused microarchitectures), but not in default. 

### x64 Stack Frame Structure 

x64 Debug Mode uses same stack frame management like x86, 
using `rbp` and `rsp` together like `ebp` and `esp` backup is used. 

However, x64 release mode manages stack frame purely by 
adding and subtracting number by using `rsp` only, with NO use of `rbp`. 

Thus, in 64 Bit release mode, stack frame access error due to 
`rbp` backup value in memory contamination by unexpected mistakes like buffer overflow. 

Still, `rip` contamination risk is equal, like `eip` do. Also, when `rip` contamination 
happens it is much harder to figure out because 64 bit stack frame is more sophisticated to analyze. 

### Function uses 

`__debugbreak` is same as assembly language command `int 3` aka interrupt by code 3 
to break for debug purpose. Unlike `abort()` or `assert()`, it only cause pure exception, 
so it is best to make dump file `.DMP`. 

`_beginthreadex` and return function, when thread created by `_beginthreadex` ends with 
return, then internally system will automatically call `_endthreadex`. However, 
`CreateThread` should always call `ExitThread()`. 

### Fucntion pointers 

Sometimes function pointers were used instead of switch case. 

```cpp
void (*ptr[100])(void); 
ptr[0] = nullptr;
ptr[3](); // type == 3
``` 

However, when `ptr[0]` is called, which is `nullptr`, then `rip` would be 0x00000000 address, 
causing CPU exception. In C++ virtual functions are way much more recommended. 

### Table based Optimization 

When calculation cost is high, use pre defined calculation table, using more memory while 
saving time for calculation. 
For instance, in 1990s and 2000s where calculation speed of decimals took long period of time 
`sin_table[360]` or `cos_table[36]` were used. Similar logic might apply today, although 
trigonometric functions are fast enough by STL nowadays. 

## Struct padding and Alignment 

All datatypes must start at boundaries of its type size 
Entire struct align will be defined by the biggest member. 

Goal of this is performance upgrade and atomicity. 

Suppose cpp struct like this 

```cpp 
struct DATA {
    char a; 
    char b; 
    short c; 
    int d; 
    short e; 
    short f; 
    char g; 
}
```

Then the padding size will be 
```
|a|b| c |
|   d   |
| e | f |
|g|X|X|X| 
```
Like this so that only last part has 3 paddings. 

Padding is `align`. If it is 1 byte char, it can be anywhere. 
However, 2 bytes datatype like `short` should start with even number address, not row number address. 
Similarly, 4 bytes datatyle like `int` or `float` should start with address divisible by 4. 
Same works for 8 bytes too. This rule applies for all compilers including 
Clang GCC and MSVC, and operating systems including Windows Linux MacOS etc. 
If struct members are only `short` and `char` then it will be align 2 struct. 

Whatever struct programming language declare, it would be such a space in CPU perspective. 
For instance struct DATA above in sample code will be just 16 bytes space for CPU, and
each member would be DATA data address like data for a data+1 for b data+2 for c data+4 for d 
data+8 for e data+10 for f etc ... Also this rule applies same in 8 bytes logic too. 
Then, what would happen for this access? 

```cpp 
int main(){
    char buffer[100]; 
    int *p = (int*) (buffer + 3); 
    *p = 0; 
    printf("a addr : 0x%p \n", &a); 
    printf("a addr : 0x%p \n", p); 
}
```
Check this fuction by disassembly with changing memory into ff ff ff ff at the 
corresponding address to change value into 00s for better comprehension. 
It will move based on boundaries. 
Reading in boundaries might be especially tricky in multithreading. If spaces are 
divided, then CPU might probably read data twice, meaning that the reading time 
between first half and second half of the memory is different. 
In multi threading environment it might change value saved at that memory not 
aligned to the original data type, so that stored value in memory change during reading. 

Also, even stack memory saving data and pointer and etc ... 
are also operating based on 4 bytes for x86-32 and 8 bytes for x86-64 unit too. 

### Dynamic allocation padding 

So, for all memory dynamic allocation process, function `malloc` will always 
give align of 8 bytes for 32 bit OS and 16 bytes for 64 bit OS. 
So, dynamic allocation of 1 byte variable like `char` will result in
7 bytes padding for 32 Bit OS and 15 bytes padding for 64 Bit OS. 

Large datatype Dynamic allocation like `_m128` or `_m256` will 
require not just simple `malloc` but `_aligned_malloc` to make it work. 

struct members do not chage position, so even in optimal compile the 
order will not change, and it is reason why padding consideration to 
declare struct of data. Although RAM is enough these days, Cache memory 
is still very limited and expensive, so padding of struct should be used these days. 

Unit to use during interaction between RAM (Dynamic DRAM) and Cache (Static DRAM) 
is 64 Bytes, and it is called as **Cache Lines**. 
